                                     The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
                                     www.emeraldinsight.com/2040-8021.htm



SAMPJ
7,2
                                     The trend of integrated reporting
                                         practice in South Africa:
                                       ceremonial or substantive?
190                                                  Abdifatah Ahmed Haji and Mutalib Anifowose
                                        Department of Accounting, International Islamic University Malaysia,
                                                            Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia


                                     Abstract
                                     Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to examine the trend of integrated reporting (IR) practice following
                                     the introduction of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in South Africa. In particular, the authors examine
                                     whether the IR practice is ceremonial or substantive in the context of a soft regulatory environment.
                                     Design/methodology/approach – By way of content analyses, the authors examine the extent and
                                     quality of IR practice using an IR checklist developed based on normative understanding of existing IR
                                     guidelines. The evidence is drawn from 246 integrated reports of large South African companies over a
                                     three-year period (2011-2013), following the introduction of IR requirement in South Africa.
                                     Findings – The results show a significant increase in the extent and quality of IR practice. The
                                     findings also reveal significant improvements in individual IR categories such as connectivity of
                                     information, materiality determination process and reliability and completeness of the integrated
                                     reports. However, despite the increasing trend and evidence of both symbolic and substantive IR
                                     practice, the authors conclude that the current IR practice is largely ceremonial in nature, produced to
                                     acquire organisational legitimacy.
                                     Practical implications – For academics, the authors argue that there is a need to move away from the
                                     “what” and “why” aspects of the IR agenda to “how” IR should work inside organisations. In particular,
                                     academics should engage with firms through interventionist research to help firms implement integrated
                                     thinking and substantive reporting practices. For organisations, the findings draw attention to specific
                                     aspects of IR that require improvement. For policymakers, the study provides evidence based on the
                                     developmental stage of IR practice and draws attention to certain areas that need clarification. In particular,
                                     the International Integrated Reporting Council and Integrated Reporting Committee of South Africa should
                                     provide detailed guidelines on connectivity of information, material issues and disclosure of multiple capitals
                                     and their trade-offs. Finally, for educators, in line with the ACCA’s embedment of IR in its accounting
                                     courses, there is a need to incorporate IR in the curriculum; in particular, the authors argue that the best way
                                     to advance IR is in a “ubiquitous” spread in accounting and management courses.
                                     Originality/value – This study provides empirical account of IR practice over time in the context of a
                                     regulatory IR environment. The construction of an IR checklist developed based on normative
                                     understanding of local and international IR guidelines is another novel approach of this study.
                                     Keywords South Africa, Integrated reporting, Legitimacy theory, Content analyses,
                                     Integrated thinking, Multiple capitals
                                     Paper type Research paper


Sustainability Accounting,           The paper has benefited from multiple reviews from several anonymous reviewers of this journal.
Management and Policy Journal        The authors are sincerely grateful to the many insightful comments of the reviewers in the
Vol. 7 No. 2, 2016
pp. 190-224                          development of this paper. The authors are also very grateful to the editor, Professor Carol
© Emerald Group Publishing Limited
2040-8021
                                     Adams, for her continuous follow up and encouragement throughout the review process. All
DOI 10.1108/SAMPJ-11-2015-0106       remaining errors are a result of the authors’ own work.
1. Introduction                                                                                        The trend of
Organisational reporting practices on economic, social and environmental issues                         integrated
continue to attract the attention of academic researchers (Guthrie and Parker, 1989; Gray
et al., 1995; Deegan et al., 2000; Williams and Adams, 2013; Vourvachis et al., 2016).
                                                                                                         reporting
Relevance and importance of this line of research is increasingly significant, given the                   practice
growing number of regional as well as global financial crises, corporate and bank
failures, climate change concerns, social and environmental disasters among other                             191
high-profile incidents. Recurring major airline disasters, and in particular the recent
Volkswagen diesel emissions scandal, stress the need for, and significance of, effective
organisational transparency and accountability measures. In particular, there is a
growing demand for information beyond traditional financial statements, information
not just on social and environmental performance but also on how companies use, create
and destroy ecological value (Coulson et al., 2015; Barter, 2015). Although, in recent
years, companies have started to provide extensive amount of financial and
non-financial disclosures using various organisational reporting platforms (de Villiers
et al., 2014), the increasing amount of corporate disclosures, particularly in
sustainability reports, is “necessary but insufficient” for substantive organisational
accountability (Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014).
    Indeed, social and environmental reporting “has become synonymous with corporate
sustainability; in the process, concern for ecology has become sidelined” (Milne and
Gray, 2013, p. 13). In their study, Williams and Adams (2013) conclude that disclosures
are “influenced by considerations other than transparency and accountability towards
employees”. These considerations include, inter alia, maintaining organisational
legitimacy through symbolic actions (Deegan et al., 2000; Vourvachis et al., 2016). In
essence, academic studies maintain that organisational reports are continuously used as
legitimation tools and have become ceremonial in nature, rather than accountability
mechanisms, peppered with selective impression management techniques that display
organisational performance the most favourable way (Brennan et al., 2009; Williams and
Adams, 2013; Vourvachis et al., 2016). On their part, companies are unhappy about the
resulting preparation as well as proprietary costs associated with increasing number of
disclosure requirements. In short, companies as well as stakeholder groups are
dissatisfied with current organisational reporting practice. Therefore, there is a need to
find a win-win solution which, on the one hand, meets substantive organisational
accountability measures, and on the other hand, is cost-effective to organisations.
    Integrated reporting (IR), which arguably avoids many of the problems associated
with the traditional organisational reporting norms, is proposed as an alternative (King,
2009; de Villiers et al., 2014; Adams, 2015a). Instituted by the International Integrated
Reporting Council (IIRC), an integrated report is defined as follows:
   […] a concise communication about how an organisation’s strategy, governance, performance
   and prospects, in the context of its external environment, lead to the creation of value over the
   short, medium and long term (IIRC, 2013a, p. 7).
Similarly, the Integrated Reporting Committee (IRC) of South Africa states that an
integrated report aims to “enable stakeholders to assess the ability of an organisation to
create and sustain value over the short-, medium- and long-term” (IRC, 2011, p. 3).
Although King III and the IIRC proposals, the major drivers of the IR agenda, emanate
from two different perspectives, their common ground is to encourage companies to go
SAMPJ   beyond financial reporting and provide “a holistic and integrated representation of the
7,2     company’s performance in terms of both its finance and its sustainability” (King, 2009,
        p. 54). In particular, both entities require companies to integrate material financial and
        non-financial information in the context of wider organisational value creation through
        the lens of multiple capitals (King, 2009; IIRC, 2013a). The ultimate aim of the IR agenda
        is to enhance organisational “accountability and stewardship for the broad base of
192     capitals […] and promote understanding of their interdependencies” (IIRC, 2013a, p. 2).
            However, a number of academic scholars are critical about the scope and substance of
        the IR agenda, in particular, the emphasis on “value to investors” and the continued
        advocacy of business case approach in the IIRC proposals (Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown
        and Dillard, 2014). Early empirical findings indicate that IR practice, albeit still at an
        early stage, suffers many of the previous organisational reporting problems (Solomon
        and Maroun, 2012; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Setia et al., 2015; IRC, 2015). For instance,
        although the empirical studies find a significant increase in the amount of non-financial
        disclosures following the adoption of IR practice (Solomon and Maroun, 2012; Setia et al.,
        2015), they observe that the integrated reports are imbued with rhetorical disclosures
        and are biased towards reporting only positive outcomes (Solomon and Maroun, 2012;
        IRC, 2015). In addition, the empirical studies reveal that companies continue to follow
        the traditional silo reporting and provide limited disclosures on organisational
        value-creation/destruction process in the context of multiple capitals (Wild and van
        Staden, 2013; IRC, 2015). The studies, however, have largely examined a single-year
        data and, therefore, provide snapshot evidence based on the developmental stage of IR
        practice.
            Mindful of the current state of IR literature and the rising concerns in terms of its
        scope and substance (Brown and Dillard, 2014; Flower, 2015), the objective of this study
        is to examine the trend of IR practice over a three-year period (2011-2013), following the
        introduction of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in South Africa. In particular, we
        examine whether the IR practice is ceremonial or substantive in nature in the context of
        regulatory environment. In doing so, we engage with the content of integrated reports to
        examine the extent and quality of IR practice using a checklist developed based on
        normative understanding of existing IR guidelines (King, 2009; IRC, 2011; IIRC, 2013a).
        Our longitudinal analyses based on 246 integrated reports of large South African
        companies show a significant increase in the extent and quality of IR practice in South
        Africa over time, with companies increasingly incorporating some of the issues
        prescribed in existing IR guidelines. We find that, on the one hand, there is a limited
        application of key IR guidelines such as “connectivity” of information, issues of
        “materiality” and multiple capitals, and when applied, tend to be highly generic and
        ambiguous. On the other hand, the three-year analyses show that IR is taking shape,
        with companies developing understanding and competency in key aspects of IR
        guidelines. We conclude that while there is evidence of both symbolic and substantive
        IR practice, the current IR practice is largely ceremonial in nature aimed to acquire
        organisational legitimacy.
            This study provides a number of contributions to existing organisational reporting
        literature. First, using an IR checklist developed based on normative understanding of
        IR guidelines (King, 2009; IRC, 2011; IIRC, 2013a), we examine the extent and quality of
        IR practice. The limited number of empirical studies have so far examined changes in
        the level of corporate disclosures following the adoption of IR practice (Solomon and
Maroun, 2012; Setia et al., 2015), rather than the application of existing IR guidelines    The trend of
(Ernst & Young, 2014; IRC, 2015). By examining the application of IR guidelines, we          integrated
inform policymakers and other stakeholders how the introduction of IR requirement has
shaped organisational reporting practice. Second, the extant IR literature has so far
                                                                                              reporting
provided a snapshot evidence of IR practice at one particular stage (Wild and van               practice
Staden, 2013; Adams, 2014; Setia et al., 2015). Therefore, little is still known about
the trend of IR practice. A significant contribution of this study is that it examines             193
the trend of IR practice over time and highlights its evolution in the context of
regulatory environment. Third, the paper, consistent with recent IR studies
(Solomon and Maroun, 2012; Setia et al., 2015), draws from legitimacy theory to
examine the nature of IR practice. Unlike prior studies, we contrast symbolic versus
substantive legitimacy-seeking behaviours to explain IR practice. In particular, the
study attributes the ceremonial nature of IR practice to the framing of existing IR
regulations in South Africa, as symbolic conformity with IR guidelines is enough to
acquire organisational legitimacy. Therefore, the theoretical interpretations inform
relevant authorities to consider succinct IR measures.
   The study from here on proceeds as follows. The ensuing section discusses IR
developments in South Africa to put the study in perspective. This is followed by review
in existing IR literature and discussion of research theory. We then discuss research
methods and sampling process. The penultimate section presents research findings
before concluding with a discussion of the study’s theoretical and policy implications.

2. Governance and integrated reporting developments in South Africa
Integrated thinking and reporting developments, which are embedded in King Code of
Governance Principles for South Africa of 2009 (King, 2009), is part of ongoing corporate
governance reforms in South Africa. The corporate governance reforms are in line with
national socioeconomic development goals (West, 2006; Andreasson, 2011; de Villiers
et al., 2014). These developments originate from two main national objectives. First, the
South African Government and businesses continue to appeal to international investors
to increase inflow of foreign direct investments to the country. The introduction of IR
requirement, as part of the wider national corporate governance reforms, is expected to
significantly enhance South Africa’s reputation and competitiveness in the global
financial markets (Atkins et al., 2015).
    Second, given the country’s quest to reduce corruption as well as social and economic
inequalities which continue post-apartheid era, IR is deemed an ideal governance
mechanism to track organisational performance, particularly their performance against
Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment (BBBEE). The BBBEE, an affirmative
action, was introduced by the South African Government to enhance the lives of
historically disadvantaged South Africans through skills development, employment in
key management positions, business ownership and socioeconomic development,
among other aspects. To initiate the process of IR following its inclusion in King III
corporate governance principles, the IRC was formed under the leadership of Professor
Mervyn King (now also the chairman of IIRC; IRC, 2011, 2015). The IRC’s discussion
paper entitled “Framework for Integrated Reporting and the Integrated Report” was
published in January 2011 as an IR guidepost for South African companies.
    More recently, and in line with these developments, the Companies Act has mandated
the establishment of a Social and Ethics board committee within 12 months from 1 May
SAMPJ   2011. The role of the Social and Ethics committee is to oversee sustainability and good
7,2     corporate citizenship practices of South African companies. In the context of integrated
        thinking and reporting, the role of the new committee includes, among other things, to
        induce integrated thinking and monitor non-financial performance metrics of
        companies. The following extract from one of the sample companies’ integrated report
        illustrates the role of the Social and Ethics committee:
194        The role of the [Social and Ethics] committee is to assist the group with overseeing
           sustainability matters and is responsible for monitoring the group’s activities with regard to
           social and economic development, good corporate citizenship, environment, health and public
           safety, consumer relationships and labour and employment practices, as prescribed by the
           Companies Act (Integrated Report, 2011, Company A).
        In summary, the ongoing corporate governance reforms, and the embedded integrated
        thinking and reporting, in South Africa explicitly advocate for an “inclusive” approach
        which takes into consideration the interests of wider stakeholder groups and, therefore,
        “reflect competing economic and social interests” (West, 2006, p. 433). South Africa,
        therefore, provides a unique setting to examine how the advocacy of “inclusive”
        stakeholder approach has influenced organisational reporting practice. In this study, we
        focus on how the introduction of IR requirement has shaped organisational reporting
        practice.

        3. Integrated reporting literature
        The extant IR literature, described as “embryonic” (de Villiers et al., 2014), has so far
        taken two paths. One research stream is conceptual in nature, with little or no concrete
        empirical evidence on the status of IR practice (Eccles and Armbrester, 2011; de Villiers
        et al., 2014; Brown and Dillard, 2014; Haller and van Staden, 2014; Simnett and Huggins,
        2015; Adams, 2015a). The second line of research is of empirical nature, both from
        academic researchers as well as surveys from professional accounting bodies (ACCA,
        2011; PwC, 2013; van Zyl, 2013; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Higgins et al., 2014; Stubbs
        and Higgins, 2014; Stent and Dowler, 2015; Setia et al., 2015). We discuss the conceptual
        and empirical studies in the following subsections.

        3.1 Conceptual studies
        The main aim of the conceptual studies is to synthesise prior developments in
        organisational reporting practices in the context of the IR agenda while at the same time
        offering ways that can broaden and open up current attempts towards IR practice
        (Brown and Dillard, 2014; Haller and van Staden, 2014; Adams, 2015a). Another
        objective of the conceptual studies is to map IR research and create a conceptual
        foundation for the growing number of academic studies (de Villiers et al., 2014; Haller
        and van Staden, 2014; Adams, 2015b; Coulson et al., 2015).
           There is, however, a division in academic scholarship on the fundamental premises of
        IR proposals (Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014; Flower, 2015; Adams,
        2015a; Coulson et al., 2015). While a number of academic scholars welcome the IR agenda
        (Eccles and Armbrester, 2011; Adams, 2015a; Coulson et al., 2015), others are sceptical
        about its scope and substance (Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014; van
        Bommel, 2014; Flower, 2015; Barter, 2015). Yet others see room for improvement and
        propose specific IR tools that incorporate the central ideas of existing IR guidelines
        (Haller and van Staden, 2014). The advocates view IR as a “paradigm shift” in
organisational reporting practice (Adams, 2015a). In particular, the IR agenda is seen as     The trend of
“a shift from a ‘financial capital market system’ to an ‘inclusive capital market system’      integrated
through recognition of multiple capitals and integrated reporting and thinking”                 reporting
(Coulson et al., 2015, p. 290), with a potential to benefit both organisations and users of
information in a number of ways (Eccles and Armbrester, 2011; Adams, 2015a).
                                                                                                  practice
    From users’ perspective, the IR proposals promise concise and connected
information, in non-technical language, about how an organisation creates and destroys               195
ecological value through the lens of multiple capitals, such as financial, manufactured,
intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natural capital (King III, 2009; IIRC,
2013a; Coulson et al., 2015). For instance, IR guidelines go beyond disclosures of broad
base of multiple capitals and require the inclusion of disclosures pertaining to trade-offs
between them (IIRC, 2013a). Consequently, IR arguably overcomes existing reporting
problems such as lengthy, technical and silo reporting (IIRC, 2013a). For organisations,
Eccles and Armbrester (2011) submit three benefits of IR, namely, internal benefits – its
ability to induce better understanding of a firm’s material financial and non-financial
metrics; external benefits – its ability to provide comprehensive information on
non-financial metrics valued by capital markets; and finally, its ability to manage
regulatory risks. From an organisational perspective, the major benefit of IR is the
embedded “integrated thinking” (King III, 2009). Integrated thinking, which precedes
IR, assists companies to identify and report material issues, both positive and negative,
in the context of wider organisational value creation (IIRC, 2013a).
    However, concerns abound as to the scope and substance of IR proposals (Milne and
Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014; van Bommel, 2014; Flower, 2015). We identify two
main concerns directed towards existing IR frameworks. First, researchers maintain
that the stated aim of IR proposals is narrow given its “investor focus” and the
markdown of less powerful indigenous stakeholders groups (Milne and Gray, 2013;
Brown and Dillard, 2014). In particular, given the stated “primary purpose of an
integrated report is to explain to providers of financial capital how an organisation
creates value over time” (IIRC, 2013a, p. 4), a number of academic scholars maintain that
the proposals are in line with the aims of traditional financial reporting and unless its
scope is broadened to an ecological frame, any hopes to enhance the substance of
organisational reporting would likely fail (Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard,
2014). A second concern relates to its actual implementation, knowing that there is
no regulatory enforcement (van Bommel, 2014; Flower, 2015). South Africa
notwithstanding, the IR agenda is still a voluntary practice internationally. For instance,
given integrated reports potentially address domains of “industrial, market, civic and
green order of worth” with contrasting interests, there is a need for reconciliation among
the divergent groups (van Bommel, 2014). Unless there is a regulatory oversight which
reconciles the interests of these divergent stakeholder groups, the IR agenda is likely to
follow prior organisational reporting rhetoric.
    Mindful of the division in academic scholarship on the IR agenda and the limited
number of empirical studies, this study intends to examine the trend of IR practice in
South Africa. In particular, we examine whether IR practice is ceremonial or substantive
in nature. The longitudinal empirical analysis asserted in this study is intended to
highlight the progress of IR over time, particularly in the context of ongoing corporate
governance reforms and regulatory oversight.
SAMPJ   3.2 Empirical studies
7,2     A growing number of empirical studies continue to examine IR practice (Solomon and
        Maroun, 2012; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Ernst & Young, 2013; Stent and Dowler, 2015;
        Setia et al., 2015). By way of content analyses of both conventional as well as integrated
        reports, the majority of the existing empirical studies explore IR practice of early
        adopting companies (Wild and van Staden, 2013; Stent and Dowler, 2015; Setia et al.,
196     2015). A growing number of empirical studies also establish some form of engagement
        through interviews and surveys with early integrated reporters (Higgins et al., 2014;
        Stubbs and Higgins, 2014; Steyn, 2014).
           The research findings, at this early stage, indicate that, although there is an increase
        in both the application of IR guidelines (Ernst & Young, 2014) as well as the amount of
        corporate disclosures following the adoption of IR practice (Solomon and Maroun, 2012;
        Setia et al., 2015), companies fail to address key aspects of existing IR guidelines as
        detailed in existing IR frameworks (Wild and van Staden, 2013; IRC, 2015). In particular,
        connectivity of information, materiality determination process and reliability and
        completeness of the integrated reports are among a number of aspects that have been
        identified as poor (PwC, 2013; Wild and van Staden, 2013; IRC, 2015). In addition,
        disclosures of multiple capitals, particularly the interdependencies and trade-offs
        between the capitals, or components of a capital, are generic rather than
        company-specific (IRC, 2015). The studies further reveal that the integrated reports are
        biased towards positive disclosures as companies continue to employ multiple
        impression management techniques using rhetorical language to exaggerate positive
        outcomes whilst ignoring negative outcomes (Solomon and Maroun, 2012; IRC, 2015). In
        essence, the adoption of IR practice has not really improved organisational reporting
        practice (Stubbs and Higgins, 2014).
           For instance, Wild and van Staden (2013) examined IR practices of 58 worldwide
        companies included in the pilot program of IIRC for the year 2011. The authors report
        that the integrated reports are lengthy rather than concise, with companies providing
        general and soft disclosures as opposed to specific and hard disclosures. In addition,
        majority of the companies have disclosed only four of the capitals (i.e. financial, human,
        natural and social capitals). A recent study conducted by the IRC of South Africa (2015)
        concurs with these observations in the South African context. In particular, the study
        found that there is limited application of IR guidelines, as the integrated reports are
        biased towards positive disclosures. In terms of the multiple capitals, the study finds
        that companies focus on financial capital and ignore other capitals even when they are
        significant to organisational activities.
           In addition, a number of studies have examined the level of corporate disclosures
        before and after the introduction of IR practice. Solomon and Maroun (2012), who
        examined the social, environmental and ethical disclosures of ten major South African
        companies before (2009) and after (2011) the regulatory changes, documented a
        significant increase in the quantity of social disclosures following the introduction of IR
        requirement. Despite the increase in social disclosures, the authors conclude that the
        “reports construct a discourse imbued with stakeholder accountability rhetoric”
        (Solomon and Maroun, 2012, p. 51). More recently, Setia et al. (2015) examined changes
        in disclosure behaviour of top 25 South African companies before (2009/2010) and after
        (2011/2012) the regulatory changes, with a focus on four capitals (i.e. human, social and
        relational, natural and intellectual capital). The findings show an overall increase in the
disclosures on the four capitals. Consistent with previous South African studies (e.g.       The trend of
Solomon and Maroun, 2012; Steyn, 2014), Setia et al. attribute the increase in disclosures    integrated
as a corporate legitimation strategy.
    Case study and survey research find that firms attach their own context-specific
                                                                                               reporting
meaning to IR (Stubbs et al., 2014; Steyn, 2014; Higgins et al., 2014; Stubbs and Higgins,       practice
2014), rather than its intended purpose (King, 2009; IIRC, 2013a). For instance, Stubbs
et al. (2014), through interviews with Australian investors, reveal that there is a                 197
significant gap between the information supplied by companies and information
required by investors. The authors conclude that, although IR has the potential to
improve business reporting, it is not yet happening. In extension to this study, Higgins
et al. (2014) reveal, through interviews of early adopting Australian firms, that
managers conceptualise IR as a “strategic story-telling” and “about meeting
expectation”. Similarly, Steyn (2014) surveyed the perceptions of senior executives of
South African listed companies on the perceived challenges and benefits of IR
implementation. Steyn finds that the perceived primary benefit, and hence motive, of IR
is enhancement of corporate reputation and legitimacy. In sum, the engagement studies
conclude that the adoption of IR practice is motivated by considerations other than
organisational accountability such as enhancement of corporate reputation and
legitimacy (Steyn, 2014; Higgins et al., 2014).
    Our study is distinctly different from prior studies in several ways. First, existing
studies have provided snapshot evidence based on yearly analyses of IR practice (Wild
and van Staden, 2013; Ernst & Young, 2014), with majority of the studies drawing
evidence from conventional annual reports rather than integrated reports (ACCA, 2011;
Stent and Dowler, 2015). In departure from previous studies, we provide longitudinal
analyses of integrated reports to track the development of IR practice over time. Second,
unlike the extant IR studies which have largely examined aspects of corporate
disclosures following the adoption of IR practice (Solomon and Maroun, 2012; Setia et al.,
2015), we examine the extent and quality of IR practice. In doing so, we construct an IR
checklist developed based on normative understanding of local and international IR
guidelines to examine the level of application of IR guidelines. Third, the limited
empirical evidence on IR practice is largely drawn from voluntary reporting settings
(Wild and van Staden, 2013; ACCA, 2011; Robertson and Samy, 2015; Stent and Dowler,
2015). The South African environment offers a different regulatory reporting
environment, given the country’s initiative to mandate IR. Therefore, there is regulatory
pressure on South African firms to produce integrated reports. For these reasons, this
study offers useful insights on the ongoing attempts to map IR practice.

4. Theoretical perspectives
Socio-political theories such as stakeholder, legitimacy and political economy
perspectives have been used in isolation or in combination to understand and explain
organisational reporting practices (Gray et al., 1995; Deegan et al., 2000; Ahmed Haji and
Mohd Ghazali, 2012; Williams and Adams, 2013; Vourvachis et al., 2016). These
theoretical resources draw from different perspectives but “all assume a pluralist
society, a society in which autonomous but interdependent groups either share power or
continuously compete for power” (Williams and Adams, 2013, p. 454). Differences in
disclosure practices are explained by corporate tendency to please the many
autonomous stakeholder groups (Deegan et al., 2000; de Villiers and van Staden, 2006;
SAMPJ   Ahmed Haji, 2013; Setia et al., 2015). By conforming to social expectations, companies
7,2     avoid “legitimacy gap” which arises when organisational actions and practices are not
        congruent with the expectations of “relevant publics” (Lindblom, 2004). We draw from
        legitimacy theory to explain the nature of IR practice.
            Legitimacy theory propounds that organisations strive to operate or appear to
        operate within socially constructed system of norms and values to maintain
198     organisational legitimacy (Suchman, 1995) because regaining or repairing
        organisational legitimacy is a very costly endeavour (O’Donovan, 2002). While research
        shows that legitimacy theory may not always be applicable to explain organisational
        reporting practices (Guthrie and Parker, 1989), it is particularly useful to explain
        organisational reactions to changes in the business environment (Deegan et al., 2000;
        Vourvachis et al., 2016). In the course of corporate legitimation strategies, organisations
        undertake symbolic or substantive actions, and in some cases, combination of both, to
        respond to changes in the business environment (Oliver, 1991; Hybels, 1995; Berrone
        et al., 2009; Soobaroyen and Ntim, 2013; Vourvachis et al., 2016). There are three levels of
        legitimacy-seeking behaviour of organisations (Suchman, 1995; Berrone et al., 2009).
            The first level of legitimacy-seeking behaviour is to involve symbolic actions. In this
        case, companies follow the “form” rather than the “substance” of the social contract
        using rhetorical language. The management strives to please the constituents
        controlling the resources through multiple impression management strategies to
        maintain legitimacy (Deegan et al., 2000; Brennan et al., 2009). However, symbolic
        actions have no material form and may only have a short-term impact on organisational
        legitimacy (Hybels, 1995; Berrone et al., 2009). It is also extremely difficult to maintain/
        gain organisational legitimacy through only symbolic practices (Oliver, 1991; Berrone
        et al., 2009). The second level of legitimacy-seeking behaviour is to combine symbolic
        and substantive practices (Berrone et al., 2009). The substantive element of this form of
        legitimacy-seeking behaviour is that organisations acknowledge the issue and affirm
        the need to resolve, often registering their (rhetorical) commitment in addressing the
        social construct. The ensuing activities and response by the company might, for
        example, be ceremonial in nature designed to acquire/maintain legitimacy. The third
        level, and highest form of legitimacy-seeking endeavour, is to undertake significant
        changes and specific organisational actions in direct alignment (response) to social or
        regulatory changes. Companies often undertake substantive changes in response to real
        or pressing legitimacy threats. Berrone et al. (2009, p. 2) conclude that:
           […] (1) Symbolic actions have a weaker positive effect on legitimacy than substantive actions,
           (2) that the impact of symbolic actions is greater when they are combined with substantive
           actions, (3) that this impact is only short-term while substantive actions have both short – and
           long-term effects.
        However, given the soft regulatory oversight of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in
        South Africa, the introduction of IR practice may not actually threaten the overall
        legitimacy of companies. The framing of regulatory requirement may, as a result, limit
        the extent and quality of IR practice. For instance, companies may only undertake
        incremental changes, rather than substantively embedding integrated thinking and
        reporting in organisational process, in response to IR requirement. Therefore, the nature
        of IR practice might be explained by certain aspects of legitimacy theory such as
        symbolic legitimacy rather than legitimacy theory as a whole.
   In this study, we examine the extent of symbolic/ceremonial, combined                      The trend of
symbolic-substantive and substantive IR practice following the introduction of an              integrated
“apply or explain” IR requirement in South Africa. In doing so, we engage with the
content of integrated reports to assess the level of application of IR guidelines in the
                                                                                                reporting
context of IR practice. We build on recent studies in South Africa and elsewhere that             practice
have adopted legitimacy theory to explain the nature of IR practice (Solomon and
Maroun, 2012; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Setia et al., 2015). For example, Setia et al.              199
(2015, p. 397) conclude that South African companies are adopting “a legitimation
strategy based on symbolic management when preparing integrated reports”. Similarly,
survey studies and case study research have also concluded that the main motivation of
adopting IR is to maintain organisational legitimacy (Higgins et al., 2014; Steyn, 2014).
In departure from previous studies, which have only provided snapshot evidence at a
certain point in time, this study examines IR practice over time. The semi-regulatory
reporting environment in South Africa provides an interesting setting to understand the
extent of corporate legitimation strategies following the adoption of IR practice,
considering the ongoing corporate governance reforms and the advocacy of an
“inclusive” stakeholder approach in South Africa.

5. Research method
5.1 Sampling process
The sampling process of this study began with identifying the largest 100 companies
listed on Johannesburg Stock Exchange, by market capitalisation, for the years
2011-2013. South African listed companies with financial year-ending on or after 1
March 2010 are required to produce an annual integrated report, or else explain why
they have not done so. Therefore, we chose the years 2011-2013 as the time frame of the
study because all listed companies were most likely to start publishing integrated
reports in 2011 (Ernst & Young, 2013). For consistency and comparability purposes, the
target was to select the same companies with integrated reports throughout the
three-year period. Owing to the amount of missing data, the final sample of this study
consists of 82 companies, producing total firm-year observations of 246 cases (82 ⫻ 3
years ⫽ 246). The integrated reports of the selected companies were retrieved from the
individual websites of the sample companies.
    Our focus on large companies is justified in the extant organisational reporting
literature in several ways (Guthrie and Petty, 2000; de Villiers and van Staden, 2006). For
example, large companies are more resourceful and can bear the implementation costs of
emerging and innovative reporting (Guthrie and Petty, 2000). In addition, given their
visibility, larger companies tend to address and respond regulatory changes quickly to
avoid any unfavourable media or regulatory attention. Given the IR regulatory
oversight in South Africa, larger companies are more likely to adopt IR practice because
of their visibility and pursuit of legitimacy.
    The information source of this study is from annual integrated reports. While
companies can provide integrated information through a number of corporate
communication channels including websites, standalone sustainability reports, press
releases as well as other reports (IIRC, 2013a), the annual integrated reports are
regularly produced. Therefore, they are useful for longitudinal studies which intend to
track specific developments in corporate reporting practices. In addition, the annual
integrated reports are considered as the primary reporting vehicle for listed companies
SAMPJ   in South Africa (IRC, 2011). Hence, they are expected to provide a detailed account of
7,2     material financial and non-financial information in the context of organisational value
        creation.

        5.2 Integrated reporting frameworks
        While the introduction of IR requirement in South Africa is largely motivated by specific
200     national objectives, as stated earlier, the nature and fundamental premises of King III, as
        detailed in the IRC (2011) of South Africa, and the IIRC proposals are fundamentally the
        same. The similarities between King and IIRC IR proposals are evident in how the two
        entities conceptualise the IR agenda. For instance, King III(2009, p. 54) states that IR
        “means a holistic and integrated representation of the company’s performance in terms
        of both its finance and its sustainability” aimed to “enable stakeholders to assess the
        ability of an organisation to create and sustain value over the short-, medium- and
        long-term”. Similarly, the IIRC (2013a, p. 33) defines IR as “a process founded on
        integrated thinking that results in a periodic integrated report by an organisation about
        value creation over time and related communications regarding aspects of value
        creation”. The aim of IR, according to the IIRC (2013a, p. 2) framework, is to:
           […] promote a more cohesive and efficient approach to corporate reporting that draws on
           different reporting strands and communicates the full range of factors that materially affect
           the ability of an organisation to create value over time.
        Both frameworks maintain that value creation is not limited to the traditional measures
        of financial performance and encourage organisations to discuss wider value creation
        through the lens of multiple capitals (IRC, 2015; Coulson et al., 2015). Given the
        fundamental similarities between the two IR frameworks, the IRC (2015) of South Africa
        has recently endorsed the IIRC (2013a) framework as guidance on good IR practice for
        South African companies as shown below:
           The International ⬍IR⬎ Framework (Framework) was issued by the International Integrated
           Reporting Council (IIRC) in December 2013. It has been endorsed by the Integrated Reporting
           Committee (IRC) of South Africa as guidance on good practice on how to prepare an integrated
           report (IRC, 2015, p. 2).
        However, one key difference between the IIRC and IRC frameworks, as identified by
        Steyn (2014), is the report audience. The stated primary stakeholder of the IIRC
        framework is the “providers of financial capital”. In contrast, the IRC of South Africa
        takes an inclusive approach and states that the:
           […] report provides a holistic view of the organisation and is useful to any stakeholder who has
           a longer term interest in the organisation enabling them to make an informed assessment of its
           ability to create and sustain value (IRC, 2011, p. 4).
        In addition, unlike the IIRC (2013a) framework which gives organisations the flexibility
        to produce integrated information in standalone reports or as part of other reports (e.g.
        annual reports), the IRC (2011) of South Africa states that the integrated report is the
        primary report of an organisation, which is in line with the “apply or explain” IR
        requirement (Steyn, 2014).
           Technically, however, there are several minor differences between the two IR
        guidelines which are largely because of basic institutional differences and different
        developmental stages of the IR agenda. As an international IR council, the IIRC provides
a detailed blueprint of what (i.e. eight content elements), how (seven guiding principles)     The trend of
and why companies should adopt IR practice. While the discussion paper of IRC (2011)            integrated
of South Africa has similarly eight content elements, it provides limited number of (five)
guiding principles. Guiding principles such as connectivity of information and
                                                                                                 reporting
conciseness of the integrated reports, which are main guiding principles in the IIRC               practice
framework, are reduced to general recommendations in the IRC of South Africa’s
discussion paper (Table I). In addition, the IIRC framework encourages companies to                   201
communicate organisational value creation through the lens of six capitals (i.e. financial,
manufactured, intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natural capital), as
opposed to only four (financial, social, economic and environmental) in the IRC
discussion paper. However, as noted earlier, the IRC (2015) of South Africa has endorsed
the IIRC framework, and hence, the two reporting frameworks are complementary
rather than conflicting. As a result, the present study examines IR practice using an IR
checklist developed based on normative understanding of local and international IR
guidelines (IRC, 2011; IIRC, 2013a). The ensuing section discusses further the
development of the IR checklist.

5.3 Content analyses procedures
Content analysis is a highly used research methodology in organisational reporting
literature and is regarded as a genuine research approach (Krippendorff, 1980; Milne
and Adler, 1999). Use of content analyses is largely “motivated by the search for
techniques to infer from symbolic data what would be either too costly, no longer
possible, or too obtrusive by the use of other techniques” (Krippendorff, 1980, p. 51). The
process, which involves making inferences from data to discover meaning of messages,
is particularly useful to examine trends and patterns in documents (Stemler, 2001).
Given the degree of subjectivity involved in the content analysis process, researchers are
cautioned to carefully address two distinct issues, namely, validity of the research
instrument and reliability of the coding process to ensure consistency and replication of
the research findings (Krippendorff, 1980; Milne and Adler, 1999; Unerman, 2000). We
have taken several measures, as discussed in the ensuing sections, to address the
validity and reliability of the research data.
    5.3.1 Validity: integrated reporting checklist. A critical stage of the content analyses
process is the identification and development of categories into which content units can
be classified to derive patterns in the presentation and reporting of information
(Krippendorff, 1980; Milne and Adler, 1999). The key is to ensure that the research
instrument measures what it intends to measure (Krippendorff, 1980). To address this
essential stage, the current study constructed an IR checklist developed based on
normative understanding of local and international IR guidelines. In constructing the
checklist, a number of sources were considered. First, reference was made to existing
versions of the IIRC frameworks (IIRC, 2011, 2013a, 2013b, 2013c). The guiding
principles of IIRC framework was used as a starting point.
    Second, we have examined the guiding principles and content elements in the
discussion paper of IRC (2011) of South Africa (see Table I). In addition, we have
considered King III (King Code of Governance for South Africa, 2009) reporting
recommendations to ensure the relevance and applicability of the checklist items to the
South African business environment. We have included elements recommended by the
IRC (2011) and King III in our checklist that the IIRC does not include in its guiding
 Table I.                                                                                                                                SAMPJ
                                                                                                                           202
 Guiding principles                                                                                                                      7,2
 and content elements

 of IR frameworks




                                 Guiding principles                                              Content elements
                                                  IRC (2011) of
No.             IIRC (2013a)                      South Africa        IIRC (2013a)                IRC (2011) of South Africa

 1              Strategic focus and future        Relevance and       Organisational overview     Report profile (What is the scope and boundary
                orientation                       materiality         and external environment    of the report?)
 2              Connectivity of information       Comparability       Governance                  Organisational overview, business model and
                                                  and consistency                                 governance structure (How do we create value
                                                                                                  and make decisions?)
 3              Stakeholder relationships         Verifiability       Business model              Understanding the operating context (What are
                                                                                                  the circumstances under which we operate?)
 4              Materiality                       Timeliness          Risks and opportunities     Strategic objectives, competencies, key
                                                                                                  performance indicators and key risk indicators
                                                                                                  (Where do we want to go and how do we intend
                                                                                                  to get there?)
                Conciseness                       Understandability   Strategy and resource       Account of the organisation’s performance
                                                  or clarity          allocation                  (How have we fared over the reporting period?)
 6              Reliability and completeness      NA                  Performance                 Future performance objectives (Informed by
                                                                                                  our recent performance, what are our future
                                                                                                  objectives?)
 7              Consistency, comparability        NA                  Outlook                     Remuneration policies (What is our approach
                and assurances                                                                    towards remuneration?)
 8              NA                                NA                  Basis of preparation and    Analytical commentary (What are the views of
                                                                      presentation                the leadership about the organisation?)

Source: IRC (2011) of South Africa and IIRC (2013a) frameworks
principles. For instance, King III recommends listed companies to provide extensive risk      The trend of
disclosures on their risk management initiatives. To examine how the integrated reports        integrated
convey such risk management disclosures, our checklist contains a section on “Risk
management practices”. In addition, we have included additional items recommended
                                                                                                reporting
by King III that the IIRC framework does not specifically prescribe. Examples of these            practice
elements include the role of audit committees, in terms of oversight and assurance, in the
IR process.                                                                                          203
    As shown in the complete checklist (Appendix), the guiding principles were decoded
and classified into specific items under each main guiding principle that can potentially
appear in the integrated reports. For instance, under the heading “Strategic focus and
future orientation”, one of the items is “connecting strategy to the wider value creation”.
Similarly, under the second heading “Connectivity of information”, there is “the
interdependencies and trade-offs between the capitals”. For selection of each item, their
objectivity in terms of identification and relevance to the South African context were
considered.
    Finally, we have examined the integrated reports of companies that have been rated
as “Excellent” and “Good” by Ernst & Young[1] Excellence in IR awards (Ernst &
Young, 2013, 2014). The objective of this screening exercise was to familiarise ourselves
the nature of IR practice and cross-check the identified items against highly regarded
integrated reports to ensure general applicability of the checklist items to the South
African environment. In the process, we have drawn additional innovative items from
the highly regarded integrated reports for inclusion in the checklist while at the same
time dropping some of the original items. This screening process is consistent with prior
studies (Li et al., 2008; Ahmed Haji and Mohd Ghazali, 2013). Examples of items
retrieved from the highly regarded integrated reports include “disappointments,
improvements made during the year, value-added statements, external assurances and
steering committees”. We have considered these multiple sources to ensure the validity
of the IR checklist in measuring IR practice. The final checklist, as shown in Appendix,
contains eight main categories and 52 specific items under the eight categories.
    5.3.2 Reliability of the research data. Two approaches are used to increase reliability
of the research findings. One approach is to use two or more coders. The scores of
different coders are then compared, with any arising discrepancies between (among) the
multiple coders requiring further investigation (Milne and Adler, 1999). Alternatively
using a single coder, after going through initial training, to assign the scores twice with
some time interval can also enhance the reliability of the research data (Unerman, 2000).
    This study has undertaken several steps to address reliability concerns. First, both
researchers had familiarised themselves with a sample of highly regarded integrated
reports using a preliminary checklist developed based on IR guidelines. Second, after the
familiarisation exercise, both researchers independently scored the 2013 integrated
reports of five companies[2] that have won the Ernst & Young Excellence in IR awards
for two consecutive years (i.e. 2012 and 2013) (Ernst & Young, 2013, 2014). The finalised
checklist was used in this reliability testing process. Individual scores were then
compared and the differences between the two independent scores were insignificant.
For instance, based on the quality of IR measure (as discussed below), the overall IR
score of the five companies obtained by one researcher was 509, whereas the other
researcher’s score was 493. The difference, which is 16, was subjected to further scrutiny
and reconciled. Finally, after the initial exercise, to ensure consistency, one of the
SAMPJ   researchers has completed the scoring task. During the scoring process, the two
7,2     researchers would discuss any arising issues.
            5.3.3 Scoring the integrated reports Once the research instrument (checklist) was
        finalised, the integrated reports were scored using both un-weighted and weighted
        scoring methods to arrive at the extent and quality of IR practice. The un-weighted
        method (dichotomous approach) assigns equal values to the checklist items regardless
204     of “how” the items appear in the integrated reports (Guthrie and Parker, 1990; Boesso
        and Kumar, 2007). The dichotomous approach is regarded as more objective and largely
        avoids any degree of subjectivity commonly known in other content analyses
        approaches. Contrary to the un-weighted approach, the weighted approach goes beyond
        “what is said” and identifies “how it is said” (Guthrie and Parker, 1990). For instance,
        previous researchers justify assigning higher weights to specific and detailed, rather
        than general and qualitative, disclosures because there is a degree of verifiability
        (Al-Tuwaijri et al., 2004; Boesso and Kumar, 2007). The implicit assumption is that a
        higher score, given the specificity and verifiability of such disclosures, would entail high
        reporting quality (Wiseman, 1982; Boesso and Kumar, 2007). In this study, we use both
        approaches to mitigate the disadvantages of each approach.
            In assessing the quality of integrated reports, a weighted scoring approach was used
        (Wiseman, 1982; Al-Tuwaijri et al., 2004; Boesso and Kumar, 2007). Building on prior
        organisational reporting literature, this study uses a detailed scoring scheme in
        measuring the quality of integrated reports (Wiseman, 1982; Boesso and Kumar, 2007).
        We have designed a scoring scheme of “0-3”, where “0” was assigned when the item in
        the checklist was not disclosed at all, and1 if the companies provided general qualitative
        disclosures. A score of 2 was assigned for specific information, and the highest score of
        3 for a detailed discussion incorporating specific organisational actions. For instance,
        depending on the nature of the checklist items, the highest score of 3 is awarded if the
        companies provided substantive information that can be verified, has already been
        verified by external assurance providers, is company-specific rather than generic and/or
        incorporates specific names of individuals/institutions. Under this approach, the quality
        of integrated reporting (QIR) score is computed as the ratio of actual scores (AS) to the
        maximum possible score (MS) (i.e. 3 ⫻ 52 ⫽ 156). Thus, the QIR score of a company is
        calculated as follows:

                                                        AS
                                               QIR ⫽
                                                        MS

        In measuring the extent of IR practice, a score of 1 was awarded if the checklist items
        appeared in the integrated reports, regardless of how it appeared, and a score of 0
        otherwise. Under this approach, the extent of integrated reporting (XIR) score was
        computed as the ratio of actual scores (AS) to the maximum possible score (MS) (i.e. 52
        items in the checklist). Thus, the XIR score of a company is calculated as follows:

                                                        AS
                                               XIR ⫽
                                                        MS
        5.4 Data analyses
        We have conducted several statistical data analyses to examine the current state and
        trend of IR practice in South Africa. First, descriptive statistics were computed to show
the overall data distribution over the three-year period. The descriptive results show          The trend of
that the data are normally distributed, and therefore, parametric data analyses can be           integrated
performed. Second, to examine the trend of IR practice over time, we have conducted               reporting
“one-way repeated measures ANOVA” analyses. There are five assumptions[3] for the
“one-way repeated measures ANOVA”, namely:                                                          practice
  (1) the dependent variable should be measured at the interval or ratio level (i.e.
        continuous variable);                                                                          205
  (2) the independent variable should consist of at least two categorical, related
        groups or matched pairs;
  (3) there should be no significant outliers in the differences between the two related
        groups;
  (4) the distribution of the dependent variable in the related groups should be
        normally distributed; and
  (5) sphericity assumption: the variances of the differences between all combinations
        of related groups must be equal.

Although the data of this study have satisfied the first four assumptions of one-way
repeated measures ANOVA, the assumption of sphericity has only been met in 2 of 18
ANOVA outputs based on Mauchly’s test of sphericity. To account for the violations of
the sphericity assumption, SPSS automatically prints corrected outputs in two epsilon
values[4]: Greenhouse-Geisser and the Huynh-Feldt which, based on adjusted degrees of
freedom, produce a more accurate (conservative) significance (p) values. The results of
this study, based on the corrected and uncorrected outputs (i.e. the significance values
shown in Wilk’s lambda, Greenhouse-Geisser or Huynh-Feldt), were largely the same.
   Additional tests such as “paired-sample t-test” and alternative non-parametric
analyses (e.g. Friedman test) were performed to provide further insights and ensure
consistency of the research findings. The following section presents the research
findings.

6. Research findings
6.1 Descriptive results
We have used two approaches to examine IR practice in South Africa, a detailed scoring
scheme and a dichotomous approach. In the first approach, we examine the level of
specificity and detail (quality), whereas in the second method, the emphasis is on the
presence/absence of information pertaining to the items at hand (extent). The maximum
possible score for the quality measure is 156 (i.e. 52 items ⫻ 3 ⫽ 156), whereas the
maximum score for the extent measure is 52 (52 ⫻ 1 ⫽ 52). The eight subcategories of the
IR checklist follow the same pattern.
    Table II presents descriptive results for the quality of IR practice for the three years
under investigation (2011-2013). The results show that the mean scores in the quality of
integrated reports have increased over time, increasing from 43.57 per cent in the year
2011 to 47.32 per cent in 2012 and to 50.16 per cent in 2013. This finding is consistent
with prior observations of improving IR practice in South Africa (Ernst & Young, 2013,
2014). Despite the increase in the mean scores, the findings show that the highest score
in the quality of IR practice is 66.03 per cent in 2011, and 69.87 per cent in 2012 and 2013,
SAMPJ                whereas the minimum scores were 12.82 per cent in 2011, and 15.38 per cent in 2012 and
7,2                  2013, indicating that the IR guidelines are not fully embraced.
                         Table II also reports results for the extent of IR practice. The results show a similar
                     increasing trend, with the mean scores increasing from 64.52 per cent in 2011 to 69.75 per
                     cent in 2012 and to 72.61 per cent in the year 2013. The results show higher scores in the
                     extent of IR, compared to the quality scores, because the nature of IR practice is mostly
206                  generic (ceremonial) rather than company-specific (substantive), as shown in the
                     following extract:
                        As an African financial services group we have a fundamental role to play in the development
                        of the societies in which we operate. The success of our customers and stakeholders underpins
                        our commercial sustainability and our ability to deliver returns to our stakeholders over the
                        long term. This forms the basis for integrated thinking and integrated reporting for the group
                        (Integrated Report, 2013a, 2013b, Company B).
                     In the above-mentioned extract, although the company does well in establishing links
                     between its fundamental role and financial success to sustainable development,
                     integrated thinking and reporting, in this context, are loosely used. There is no further
                     elaboration to highlight “how” integrated thinking and reporting shapes organisational
                     value creation. Hence, the generic use of “integrated thinking and integrated reporting”,
                     in the above-mentioned extract, is symbolic, rather than substantive, aimed to showcase
                     conformity with existing IR guidelines.
                         Table III presents further insights on IR scores in terms of distribution of the sample
                     companies. Based on the quality of IR practice, the results show that the IR scores of the


                                          Quality of IR scores-scoring (0-3)            Extent of IR scores-scoring (0, 1)
                                          2011          2012           2013             2011          2012           2013

                       Minimum (%)       12.82         15.38         15.38            19.23           23.08        23.08
                       Maximum (%)       66.03         69.87         69.87            92.31           96.15        98.08
Table II.              Mean (%)          43.57         47.32         50.16            64.52           69.75        72.61
Descriptive statistics SD                10.99         10.8          11.03            15.04           14.62        14.41
on integrated reports: Skewness          ⫺0.331        ⫺0.54         ⫺0.573           ⫺0.640          ⫺0.840       ⫺0.950
2011-2013              Kurtosis           0.351         0.446         0.414            0.341           0.918        1.128



                                2011                               2012                                  2013
                     Quality    No. of                Quality      No. of                   Quality      No. of
                     of IR      firms       (%)        of IR       firms        (%)          of IR       firms        (%)

                     ⱖ70           0         0        ⱖ70             0          0          ⱖ70             0          0
                     60-69.9       5         6.1      60-69.9         8          9.76       60-69.9        13         15.9
                     50-59.9      20        24.4      50-59.9        29         35.4        50-59.9        33         40.2
                     40-49.9      29        35.4      40-49.9        28         34.1        40-49.9        22         26.8
Table III.           30-39.9      21        25.6      30-39.9        12         14.6        30-39.9         9         11
Distribution of IR   20-29.9       4         4.88     20-29.9         4          4.88       20-29.9         4          4.88
scores among         10-19.9       3         3.66     10-19.9         1          1.22       10-19.9         1          1.22
companies-using      1-9.9         0         0.00     1-9.9           0          0.00       1-9.9           0          0.00
quality scores       Total        82       100        Total          82        100          Total          82        100
sample companies were above 10 per cent but below 70 per cent throughout the                      The trend of
three-year period. Most companies (35.4 per cent) had scores ranging from 40 to 49.90              integrated
per cent in 2011, with only 25 of the sample companies (30.5 per cent) having scores of 50
per cent or more. In 2012 and 2013, however, most companies had scores of 50 per cent
                                                                                                    reporting
to 59.90 per cent. Despite the increasing number of companies with improving IR scores,               practice
the findings show that the quality of IR practice was lower than 70 per cent throughout
the three-year period.                                                                                   207

6.2 Analyses of integrated reporting categories
Building on the IRC (2011) of South Africa and IIRC (2013a) IR guidelines, we examine IR
practice using eight IR categories. This section presents the scores in each category as
proportion of maximum possible scores. The results presented in Table IV show the
quality of IR practice for each category. In terms of the quality scores, the “stakeholder
relationships” category is ranked highest in all three years, accounting for 59.96 per cent
in 2011, 63.96 per cent in 2012 and 66.40 per cent in 2013. Ranked second and third are
“strategic focus” and “conciseness”, respectively. The lowest disclosed categories are
“consistency, comparability and assurance” (ranked seventh), and “reliability and
completeness” of IR practice (ranked eighth). These findings are consistent with recent
studies in South Africa that have observed low levels of application in certain aspects of
the IR guidelines such as the comparability, reliability and completeness of the
integrated reports (Ernst & Young, 2014; IRC, 2015).
   The results presented in Table V show the extent of IR scores by category. The
results are slightly different from the quality scores described in Table IV as
“conciseness” and “stakeholder relationships” take the front two positions across all the
three years, respectively. The “strategic focus” is ranked third in 2011 and 2012, with
“risk management practices” moving from fifth position in 2011 to fourth in 2012 and to
third in 2013. However, the lowest disclosed categories are “materiality” (ranking sixth
in 2011 and seventh thereafter), “connectivity of information” (ranked seventh in 2011
and sixth thereafter) and “reliability and completeness” (ranked eighth in all three
years).
   The findings indicate that the cornerstones of IR (e.g. materiality, connectivity of
information, and reliability and completeness) are poorly incorporated in the integrated
reports. This finding is in line with the recent study by the IRC (2015, p. 4) of South
Africa which observed that:
   […] the inability to meet to the fullest extent the guiding principles of comparability and
   reliability, and completeness because of a lack of measurable data or trends, is regarded by
   some organisations as reason to exclude reporting on outcomes.
On the other hand, the most disclosed categories, which are “stakeholder relationships”,
“strategic focus” and “risk management practices”, are imbued with soft and generic
disclosures to exaggerate positive trends whilst avoiding, or dismissing, negative
outcomes in organisational performance. In particular, there is an overwhelming
preference to provide symbolic gestures on stakeholder relationships in an attempt to
address issues of national concern such as the BBBEE (van Zyl, 2013). However, the
results show some encouraging progress, in terms of ranking, on certain aspects of IR
practice including the “connectivity of information”. The next section presents further
insights into individual aspects of IR categories.
 Table IV.
 Scores of integrated                                                                                                           208            SAMPJ
 reporting by                                                                                                                                  7,2
 category of
 information-quality
 scores (0-3)




                                            Year 2011                                Year 2012                               Year 2013
                               Maximum     Actual                      Maximum      Actual                     Maximum      Actual
IR categories                   score      score    (%)     Ranking     score       score    (%)     Ranking    score       score    (%)      Ranking

Strategic focus                  1,968      1,032   52.44   2nd           1,968     1,108    56.30   2nd           1,968     1,158    58.84   2nd
Connectivity of information      1,968        834   42.38   5th           1,968       927    47.10   4th           1,968     1,014    51.52   4th
Stakeholder relationships        1,476        885   59.96   1st           1,476       944    63.96   1st           1,476       980    66.40   1st
Materiality                      1,722        736   42.74   4th           1,722       788    45.76   5th           1,722       816    47.39   5th
Risk management practices        1,722        684   39.72   6th           1,722       746    43.32   6th           1,722       764    44.37   6th
Conciseness                      1,230        592   48.13   3rd           1,230       625    50.81   3rd           1,230       654    53.17   3rd
Reliability and completeness     1,968        578   29.37   8th           1,968       654    33.23   8th           1,968       756    38.41   7th
Consistency, comparability
and assurance                      738        233   31.57   7th             738       261    35.37   7th            738        275    37.26   8th
Total                           12,792      5,574   43.57                12,792     6,053    47.32               12,792      6,417    50.16

Notes: aActual score/maximum score (1,032/1,968 ⫽ 52.44%); for instance, maximum score of 1,968 is obtained among the eight items in “Strategic focus”
category ⫻ 3 points ⫻ 82 companies
                                          Year 2011                             Year 2012                             Year 2013
                               Maximum   Actual                    Maximum     Actual                    Maximum     Actual
IR categories                   score    score    (%)    Ranking    score      score    (%)    Ranking    score      score    (%)    Ranking

Strategic focus                  656       511   77.90   3rd           656       526   80.18   3rd           656       538   82.01   4th
Connectivity of info             656       332   50.61   7th           656       381   58.08   6th           656       421   64.18   6th
Stakeholder relationships        492       385   78.25   2nd           492       412   83.74   2nd           492       414   84.15   2nd
Materiality                      574       291   50.7    6th           574       321   55.92   7th           574       329   57.32   7th
Risk management practices        574       414   72.13   5th           574       456   79.44   4th           574       477   83.10   3rd
Conciseness                      410       356   86.83   1st           410       361   88.05   1st           410       370   90.24   1st
Reliability and completeness     656       284   43.29   8th           656       327   49.85   8th           656       354   53.96   8th
Consistency, completeness
and assurance                     246      178   72.36   4th           246       190   77.24   5th           246       193   78.46   5th
Total                           4,264    2,751   64.52               4,264     2,974   69.75               4,264     3,096   72.61

Notes: aActual score/maximum score (511/656 ⫽ 77.90%); for instance, maximum score of 656 is obtained 8 items in ‘Strategic Focus’ category ⫻
1 point ⫻ 82 companies




           Table V.
 Scores of integrated                                                                                                          The trend of
        reporting by                                                                                                            integrated
         category of
  information-extent
                                                                                                                                 reporting
         scores (0, 1)                                                                                                 209         practice
SAMPJ   6.2 Additional analyses
7,2     The preceding discussion showed that “stakeholder relationships” and “strategic
        focus” are the highest disclosed categories. We discuss the IR items in these leading
        as well as other categories in turn. First, the items in the “stakeholder relationships”
        category include stakeholder engagement, communication channels to stakeholders
        and taking stewardship and responsibility for organisational actions. Disclosure of
210     these items allows a company to appear “socially aware” and, as a result, maintain
        its legitimacy. In particular, the discussion pertaining to “stakeholder relationships”
        largely circles around the BBBEE initiatives, with firms disclosing their attempts to
        alleviate poverty and increase equal employment opportunities. In doing so,
        companies select positive trends and benchmarks that display organisational image
        the most favourable way:
           This past year, we continued to make excellent progress in our transformation activities in
           South Africa. We achieved level 3 broad-based black economic empowerment (BBBEE)
           contributor status, improving from level 4. Our unwavering focus on equity ownership,
           enterprise and socioeconomic development, employment equity, skills development and
           preferential procurement are delivering exceptional results – well beyond the stretch targets
           we had set for ourselves (Integrated Report, 2013a, 2013b, Company C).
        While the above-mentioned disclosures are substantive in terms of verifiability (i.e.
        improving from Level 4 to Level 3), they are nonetheless selective and represent
        attempts to address issues of social concern to enhance corporate reputation, with
        companies using the integrated report as a legitimation tool, rather than an
        organisational accountability tool which balances both positive and negative trends.
        There also seems a form of uniformity in the positive tone of disclosure language, with
        companies conforming to a similar reporting pattern, a pattern which strategically
        targets the soft spots of relevant publics (e.g. women training, reference to historically
        disadvantaged groups), as shown in the following extract:
           We provided significant opportunity for personal advancement in the year. Our group
           expenditure on training amounted to R638 million (2012: R605 million), of which R19,6 million
           (2012: R17,7 million) was invested in our graduate programme. Of the 184 people (2012: 181)
           who participated in the 2013 graduate programme, 43 per cent are women and 80 per cent of
           the South African complement was black (Integrated Report, 2013a, 2013b, Company D).
        The second leading category, “strategic focus”, has eight items. The elements
        included in the “strategic focus” section, despite containing innovative reporting
        elements, relate to particular IR developments (e.g. basis of IR preparation) and so
        discussions pertaining such items are expected. For instance, a significant number
        of companies (71.95 per cent in 2011, 68.29 per cent in 2012 and 69.51 per cent in
        2013) have reported their “Commitment to continuous integrated thinking and
        reporting” following the introduction of IR requirement. The chairman of one of the
        sample companies welcomed the introduction of IR practice in South Africa, as
        shown in the following extract:
           An important governance development this year has been the requirement, in terms of the
           King Code of Governance Principles for South Africa (King III Code), to publish an integrated
           annual report. This forms part of a broader global governance trend that seeks to promote
           more effective disclosure of the information needed by stakeholders to assess the true
           economic value of organisations. I welcome this trend, in the belief that it will prompt an
   improved appreciation within business of the strategic significance of societal issues, as well   The trend of
   as encouraging business to play an active role in addressing the social, economic and
   environmental challenges that we face (Integrated Report, 2011, Company E).
                                                                                                      integrated
                                                                                                       reporting
In line with legitimacy theory’s continuum of symbolic, combined symbolic-substantive and                practice
substantive actions, the chairman responds to the introduction of IR practice to indicate that
the company’s reporting practices are congruent with regulatory developments. As a result,
the company is expected to avoid unfavourable regulatory or stakeholder attention.                          211
    In terms of “connectivity of information”, the analyses show that the level of
integration is growing. The number of companies with unique IR disclosures has
significantly increased over time. For instance, a growing number of companies have
provided disclosures on “interrelatedness and dependencies between the factors that
affect a firm’s ability to create value over time” (17.07 per cent in 2011, 23.17 per cent in
2012 and 37.8 per cent in 2013) and “changes in strategy when new risks and
opportunities are identified” (24.39, 34.15 and 41.46 per cent, respectively). Similarly, of
particular significance to IR are the disclosures on “interdependencies and trade-offs
between the capitals”. The results show that the number of companies reporting “the
capitals” have started slowly with the trend showing a significant increase over time
from just 3.66 per cent (three companies) in 2011 to 9.76 per cent in 2012 to 23.17 per cent
in 2013. The following quote shows how a company responds to the capitals framework:
   Our ability to create value depends on certain forms of capital, how we use them and our
   impact on them. We apply the capitals model, initially developed by Forum for the Future, in
   managing and assessing our ability to create value over time. Our report aims to explain how
   we use and affect the capitals. We recognise that the capitals are interrelated and fundamental
   to the long-term viability of our business. Intellectual capital is integrated into the human,
   financial and manufactured capitals as this better reflects the nature of our business as a
   financial services organisation (Integrated Report, 2013a, 2013b, Company F).
However, while the companies are increasingly acknowledging the multiple capitals
framework, the integrated reports are not actually aligned to the capitals framework. In
particular, the positive and negative trade-offs between the capitals, or components of a
capital, are not systematically reported. As a result, the recognition that “the capitals are
interrelated and fundamental to the long-term viability of our business”, as stated in the
above extract, is generic rather than company-specific aimed to establish symbolic
conformity with IR guidelines.
   Application of other IR guidelines is also disappointing. Discussion of material issues
is particularly low, and when reported, companies tend to provide rather passive and
vague disclosures of material issues. For instance, few companies (3.66, 8.54 and 9.76 per
cent in the respective years) have reported “interrelationships between material issues”.
Similarly, a limited number of companies (20.73, 26.83t and 25.61 per cent, respectively)
have disclosed “identification, prioritization and approval of material issues”. The
limited and ambiguous disclosures notwithstanding, there is nonetheless an increasing
trend.
   Another disappointing area of the integrated reports is the “reliability and
completeness” of the integrated reports. The integrated reports, despite the explicit calls
to balance positive and negative information in existing IR guidelines, are biased
towards positive disclosures, with companies exaggerating positive information whilst
ignoring negative outcomes. Finally, the “consistency, comparability and assurances”
SAMPJ                   category, despite the increasing number of companies providing limited external
7,2                     assurance on non-financial information (45.12, 58.54 and 62.2 per cent in respective
                        years), it is another area which requires significant improvement (IRC, 2015). Taken
                        together, the findings suggest that there is limited but growing application of IR
                        guidelines in South Africa.

212                     6.3 Trend of integrated reporting
                        The aim of our longitudinal analyses is to examine the trend of IR practice, both in
                        overall and in categories. In line with this aim, we have conducted the parametric
                        “one-way repeated measures ANOVA” to examine the trend of IR practice over time.
                        The results presented in Table VI show the trend in the quality and extent of IR practice
                        for both the overall as well as subcategory scores. The results, based on both corrected
                        and uncorrected values, indicate that the overall scores in the quality and extent of IR
                        practice have both increased significantly over the three-year period at the 1 per cent
                        significance level, p ⫽ 0.000. The results also reveal a significant increasing trend in the
                        quality and extent of all IR categories.
                           Given that the one-way repeated measures ANOVA can only reveal a difference
                        somewhere over the three-year period, we have performed further analyses between
                        years based on paired sample t-tests. The results in Table VII show that the significant

                                                               Quality of IR                          Extent of IR
                                                       2011 2012 2013                        2011 2012 2013
                        Overall and categories             Mean scores       p-value*            Mean scores       p-value*

                        Overall IR scores              43.57   47.32   50.16      0.000***   64.52   69.75   72.61    0.000***
                        Strategic focus                52.44   56.30   58.84      0.000***   77.90   80.18   82.01    0.002***
                        Connectivity of information    42.38   47.10   51.52      0.000***   50.61   58.08   64.18    0.000***
                        Stakeholder relationships      59.96   63.96   66.40      0.001***   78.25   83.74   84.15    0.008***
                        Materiality                    42.74   45.76   47.39      0.000***   50.7    55.92   57.32    0.000***
                        Risk management practices      39.72   43.32   44.37      0.000***   72.13   79.44   83.10    0.000***
                        Conciseness                    48.13   50.81   53.17      0.001***   86.83   88.05   90.24    0.038**
                        Reliability and completeness   29.37   33.23   38.41      0.000***   43.29   49.85   53.96    0.000***
                        Consistency, completeness
Table VI.               and assurance                 31.57 35.37 37.26 0.000*** 72.36 77.24 78.46 0.008***
One-way repeated
measures ANOVA:       Notes: * The p-values are presented using both corrected (Greenhouse-Geisser and the Huynh-Feldt)
mean scores in IR     and uncorrected, as the case may be; the corrected and uncorrected p-values were largely
over time (2011-2013) similar; *** increased at the 1% significance level; ** increased at the 5% significance level



                                                  Overall-using detailed scoring                 Overall-using dichotomous
                                                         scheme (quality)                         scoring scheme (extent)
                        Years                    t-value            Significance              t-value             Significance
Table VII.              2011 and 2012            ⫺3.745                0.000***               ⫺5.230                 0.000***
Paired samples t-test   2011 and 2013            ⫺6.590                0.000***               ⫺8.091                 0.000***
for differences in IR   2012 and 2013            ⫺2.846                0.000***               ⫺2.861                 0.000***
scores between any
two years               Note: *** Increased at the 1% significance level
increases occurred between any two years, and not just over the three-year period. The         The trend of
significant increases between the years, in addition to the overall increasing trend,           integrated
suggest that companies are making progress towards IR practice. This finding is
consistent with recent studies in South Africa that have observed progress in both
                                                                                                 reporting
application of IR guidelines as well as the level of corporate disclosures following the           practice
adoption of IR practice (Ernst & Young, 2014; Setia et al., 2015).
                                                                                                      213
6.4 Discussion: ceremonial versus substantive integrated reporting practice
We come back to our research question: is IR practice actually ceremonial or substantive
in nature? We find that the current IR practice is largely ceremonial in nature. We
provide four main observations to illustrate the ceremonial nature of the IR practice.
First, given the soft regulatory oversight in South Africa, symbolic conformity with IR
requirements is enough to maintain organisational legitimacy. Consequently,
companies provide symbolic gestures based on selected IR terminologies to showcase
compliance with certain aspects of IR guidelines. For instance, the integrated reports are
imbued with random IR terms such as “increases, decreases, transformations, outputs
and outcomes” of the capitals. However, these terms often appear in a generic, even out
of context, manner in the integrated reports. In particular, companies fail to provide
contextualised, company-specific disclosures about the interdependencies and
trade-offs between the factors that affect organisational value creation. In essence, the
adoption of IR practice has not brought major shifts in how companies establish
connectivity between various financial and non-financial measures. Second, we find that
there is no particular reporting identity following the adoption of IR guidelines. The IR
guidelines emphasise the “comparability and consistency” of the integrated reports “on
a basis that is consistent over time and in a way that enables comparison with other
organisations” (IIRC, 2013a, p. 5). However, the integrated reports are chronically
inconsistent over time and across organisations. This is largely because of the limited
application of existing IR guidelines and content elements across organisations.
   Third, despite the calls for inclusion of all material matters, both positive and
negative, in a balanced way (IRC, 2011; IIRC, 2013a), companies continue to exaggerate
positive information whilst underplaying, or dismissing, negative outcomes. In
particular, companies ignore negative trade-offs between multiple capitals, or
components of a capital. Finally, companies continue to conceptualise organisational
“value creation” in the traditional measures of financial performance. While the IR
agenda, and the embedded integrated thinking, promise to bring a shift from “financial
capital market system” to an “inclusive capital market system” through recognition of
multiple capitals (Coulson et al., 2015), that is not the case in practice because companies
continue to discuss “sustainability” issues in the context of traditional financial
performance measures such as return on equity. However, there are a number of
emerging themes that have the potential to transform current IR practice into
substantive practice. We discuss these themes in the following section.
   6.4.1 Substantive integrated reporting practice. The ceremonial nature of IR practice,
notwithstanding, there are a number of emerging features that has the potential to
enhance the quality of IR practice. During the analyses, we have observed features that
distinctly differentiate the IR practice from conventional reporting norms. Albeit the
majority of the “features” we have observed were general and at times vague constructs,
there were, nonetheless, promising indications of a new (substantive) reporting
SAMPJ   tradition. For instance, in line with IR guidelines’ calls for balancing positive and
7,2     negative information, a number of companies have shown innovative ways, than has
        previously been the case in conventional annual reports, to make contrasts from
        “highlights” to “lowlights”, “great stuff” to “bad stuff”, “achievements” to
        “disappointments” and “positives” to “negatives”. There seemed an “IR factor” pushing
        companies to disclose unfavourable information, beyond image-building good news
214     disclosures. For instance, the following extract discloses specific challenges a company
        faced during the year:
           The year did have its challenges though, with a regrettable network outage on 30 June that
           affected some of our customers for a part of the day. We learned a number of good lessons from
           that event and based on this we made both process changes and targeted investment to
           increase network resilience and limit the risk of this happening again (Integrated Report, 2012,
           Company G).
        The “risks and opportunities” aspect of IR guidelines, which encourage companies to go
        beyond the predictable positive disclosures and include negative and disappointing
        stories in a balanced way, is gaining momentum. The following quote shows how a
        company reports several significant challenges, using negative wording, in its
        integrated report:
           We are under siege on many fronts. We have lost credibility with some of our customers,
           especially residential, in terms of service and our inability to communicate with them.

           • Shrinking revenues and profits. The business faces many pressures, notably
             increased competition and pricing pressure throughout.
           • Our culture is not where it should be. Currently it neutralizes any initiative
             because of old hierarchical structures and lack of accountability.
           • Our traditional business revenues are declining and, as a result, we have to get the
             basics in place and focus on growing where our strengths lie
           • Costs. Compared to our peers we are less efficient than they are. Given the decline
             in revenue streams it is vital that we find an effective process to drive down cost
             (Integrated Report, 2012, Company H).

        Although traditionally it is common for South African firms to disclose fatalities in their
        annual reports, there is nonetheless an increasing trend in doing so:
           In terms of the lows, while we improved our safety performance we still had three contractor
           fatalities. This is unacceptable and we’re redoubling our efforts to achieve zero fatalities in all
           our operations (Integrated Report, 2013a, 2013b, Company I).
        While the discussions on multiple capitals are largely generic, a growing number of
        companies recognise the interrelatedness and trade-offs between the capitals, or
        components of a capital as shown below:
           Our report aims to explain how we use and affect the capitals. We recognise that the capitals
           are interrelated and fundamental to the long-term viability of our business. Intellectual capital
           is integrated into the human, financial and manufactured capitals as this better reflects the
           nature of our business as a financial services organisation (Integrated Report, 2013a, 2013b,
           Company J).
A third emerging feature in the integrated reports is the increasing number of                             The trend of
companies reporting external assurances in non-financial information. Companies                             integrated
incorporate innovative features in the integrated reports to highlight that certain                          reporting
non-financial information is assured by external assurance providers. Albeit companies
tend to seek “limited” external assurances in non-financial information, a significant
                                                                                                               practice
number of companies report that the audit committee function assumes responsibility
for the integrity of the integrated reports to compensate the limited level of external                           215
assurance in non-financial information. Conventionally, the responsibility of the audit
committee function was limited to monitoring the quality of financial reporting process.
This emerging trend in non-financial information assurances seems to extend the role of
audit committee in monitoring the quality of non-financial information. External
assurance in non-financial information, and the involvement of audit committee in the
process, has the potential to enhance the veracity and reliability of corporate disclosures.
Examples of such disclosures in integrated reports include.
   External assurance obtained in the current year also included limited assurance on
selected sustainability information. Environmental targets are provided for the first
time and, therefore, no comparisons against targets for prior years were possible […].
The combined assurance approach will be enhanced further in future years to confirm
the appropriate application of integrated reporting principles and the integrity of data
contained in future Reports (Integrated Report, 2011, Company K).
   The report is reviewed by the audit committee and the board of directors to satisfy
themselves of the materiality, accuracy and balance of disclosures. In addition, the
various aspects of the integrated report are independently assured by a number of
assurance providers (Integrated Report, 2012, Company L).
   Finally, companies reveal difficulties and challenges in the IR process. In particular, firms
have challenges in the identification, prioritisation and determination of material matters. In
most cases, companies use traditional organisational proxies such as risk management
framework to describe organisational material issues, as shown in the following extract:
   The diversity of businesses in the [XYZ] Group and the corresponding diversity of stakeholders
   sometimes makes it difficult to determine which issues pass the test of materiality. For the purposes
   of this first Integrated Report, management has chosen to use the Company’s risk management
   framework as a guide to materiality (Integrated Report, 2011, Company N).
The confusion on what constitutes “material” issues results in rhetorical disclosures and
generic statements, rather than company-specific material matters, with companies citing
general issues such as regulation, economic and political challenges, as well as stiff
competition as material issues. In addition, companies provide mere indications that
the material matters were considered without describing the process, in particular, whether
the company has engaged with relevant stakeholders in identifying material issues. The
following extract indicates challenges in the identification of material issues, with some
companies seeking external expertise to assist them in the identification process:
   During the year under review, management appointed an external service provider to assist
   the Group with the implementation of integrated reporting. This included the determination of
   material issues and the way in which the Group would report internally each month. The
   Chairman of the ARC Committee was nominated by the Board as the Group’s champion for
   integrated reporting (Integrated Report, 2011, Company P).
SAMPJ   In summary, at this developmental stage of the IR journey, we find that there is evidence
7,2     of both ceremonial and substantive IR practice. The trend analyses show that
        companies are increasingly aligning the integrated reports to existing IR guidelines.
        However, the integrated reports are biased towards positive disclosures as companies
        continue to use the integrated report as a legitimation tool. In addition, there is limited
        application of key IR aspects such as connectivity of information, materiality
216     determination process and trade-offs between the multiple capitals, or components of a
        capital, in the integrated reports.

        7. Concluding remarks
        The purpose of this study is to examine the state and trend of IR practice in South Africa.
        In particular, we examine whether the IR practice is ceremonial or substantive in nature,
        based on the existing IR guidelines. In doing so, we engage with the content of integrated
        reports to examine the extent and quality of IR practice for the years 2011-2013,
        following the introduction of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in South Africa.
        Drawing from 246 integrated reports over the three-year period, the findings show a
        significant increase in the extent and quality of IR practice over time. We find that
        companies are increasingly acknowledging the interdependencies and trade-offs
        between the factors that affect organisational value creation. The increasing trend,
        notwithstanding, the results reveal that key aspects of IR practice (e.g. issues of
        materiality and connectivity of information) are poorly incorporated in the integrated
        reports. In addition, the reliability and completeness of the integrated reports is low as
        companies continue to exaggerate positive disclosures whilst obscuring, or dismissing,
        negative information. Moreover, multiple capital disclosures are generic, rather than
        company-specific, as companies hardly discuss trade-offs between the capitals. In sum,
        while there is evidence of both symbolic and substantive IR practice in South Africa, our
        findings generally suggest that the current IR practice is largely ceremonial in nature,
        aimed to acquire organisational legitimacy (Steyn, 2014; Setia et al., 2015).
            This study has a number of implications for several groups. First, for academics,
        given the “embryonic” state of IR research, this study provides a longitudinal account of
        the state and development of IR practice. On the one hand, the research findings show
        that IR practice is taking shape, with companies increasingly, albeit metaphorically,
        aligning the integrated reports to IR guidelines. This suggests that companies are open
        to new organisational reporting innovations (Robertson and Samy, 2015). However, the
        ceremonial nature of IR practice is largely because of lack of proper understanding of
        “how” IR works. Part of this is due to limited academic and professional research that
        have attempted to decode existing IR guidelines and provide specific instruments to
        assist companies into the transition of IR practice (Haller and van Staden, 2014; Adams,
        2015a). Academic researchers could engage with companies through interventionist
        research to help them implement integrated thinking and substantive reporting. There
        is also a need to develop additional reporting instruments and tools that incorporate and
        elaborate the central ideas of IR guidelines (Haller and van Staden, 2014).
            Second, for international policymakers, the empirical insights of this study, which
        are drawn from a regulatory IR environment, highlight IR practice, despite challenges,
        is making progress over time. Emerging countries, in particular, may find the research
        results from the South African IR experience useful towards introducing IR requirement
        in their bids to enhancing their competitiveness and reputation in the global financial
markets. Third, the findings inform local regulatory authorities the extent and quality of          The trend of
IR practice over time, and draws attention to specific areas of IR practice that require             integrated
improvement. In particular, the authorities should provide specific reporting guidelines
on issues of materiality, connectivity of information and disclosure of multiple capitals.
                                                                                                      reporting
Finally, for educators, there is a need to incorporate IR in the curriculum. For instance,              practice
ACCA has already embedded IR in its qualifications since December 2014, in particular
in four papers (i.e. P3, P4, P5 and P7) (ACCA, 2014). At the university level, we argue that               217
the best way to introduce IR is in a “ubiquitous” spread in accounting and management
courses.
    The findings of this study must be interpreted within the context of several
limitations. First, the study is limited to South Africa where IR is mandatory. Future
studies should draw evidence from other countries, or provide comparative analyses
involving South Africa and elsewhere (voluntary setting) to provide useful insights.
Second, the content analyses task is inherently subject to reliability and validity
concerns that could potentially undermine the research findings (Milne and Adler, 1999).
However, we have taken several measures to reduce the level of subjectivity and
enhance the reliability of research findings. An alternative research approach is to
undertake an in-depth investigation involving few cases to observe IR in action, in
particular to consider “production and transmission of the message” as well as the
“construction of the message” (Tregidga et al., 2012). Finally, this study did not
specifically examine the tone, language and placement of disclosures in the integrated
reports (Williams and Adams, 2013). Future studies should present a more focused
assessment through discourse analyses to examine the language of the integrated
reports, in particular, how companies integrate and discuss issues of materiality and the
multiple capitals in the context of organisational value creation.


Notes
 1. Ernst & Young introduced Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards for IR practice in 2011.
    The aim of the award is to enhance the quality of integrated reporting practice of South
    African listed companies and state-owned entities.
 2. The five companies that have consistently won the Ernst & Young Excellence in Integrated
    Reporting Awards are Sasol, Royal Bafokeng Platinum, Standard Bank, Truworths
    International Ltd. and Gold Fields.
 3. For further discussion on the assumptions of one-way repeated measures ANOVA,
    see https://statistics.laerd.com/spss-tutorials/one-way-anova-repeated-measures-using-spss-
    statistics.php
 4. If the Mauchly’s test is insignificant, then the sphericity assumption has been met. However,
    if it is significant, Greenhouse-Geisser and the Huynh-Feldt should be considered. To choose
    between them, Huynh-Feldt is used when the epsilon value is greater than 0.75. If the epsilon
    value is less than 0.75, then Greenhouse-Geisser is used.


References
ACCA (2011), “Adoption of integrated reporting by the ASX 50: a joint report from ACCA and the
     Net Balance Foundation”, available at: www.accaglobal.com/content/dam/acca/global/
     PDF-technical/sustainability-reporting/tech-tp-air2.pdf (accessed 22 April 2015).
SAMPJ   ACCA (2014), “ACCA embeds integrated reporting”, available at: www.accaglobal.com/my/
               en/student/acca-qual-student-journey/sa/features/acca-embeds-integrated-reporting.
7,2            html (accessed 22 April 2015).
        Adams, C. (2015a), Understanding Integrated Reporting: The Concise Guide to Integrated
               Thinking and the Future of Corporate Reporting, Doˉ Sustainability, Oxford.
        Adams, C. (2015b), “The international integrated reporting council: a call to action”, Critical
218            Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 27, pp. 23-28.
        Adams, C.A. (2014), “Changing the way business is done: a critical review of two South African
               integrated reports”, The Sustainability and Integrated Reporting Handbook, Alive2Green.
        Ahmed Haji, A. (2013), “Corporate social responsibility disclosures over time: evidence from
               Malaysia”, Managerial Auditing Journal, Vol. 28 No. 7, pp. 647-676.
        Ahmed Haji, A. and Mohd Ghazali, N.A. (2012), “The influence of the financial crisis on corporate
               voluntary disclosure: some Malaysian evidence”, International Journal of Disclosure and
               Governance, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 101-125.
        Ahmed Haji, A. and Mohd Ghazali, N.A. (2013), “A longitudinal examination of intellectual capital
               disclosures and corporate governance attributes in Malaysia”, Asian Review of Accounting,
               Vol. 21 No. 1, pp. 27-52.
        Al-Tuwaijri, S., Christensen, T. and Huges, K. (2004), “The relations among environmental
               disclosure, environmental performance, and economic performance: a simultaneous
               equations approach”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 29, pp. 447-471.
        Andreasson, S. (2011), “Understanding corporate governance reform in South Africa
               Anglo-American divergence, the King reports, and hybridization”, Business and Society,
               Vol. 50 No. 4, pp. 647-673.
        Atkins, J.F., Solomon, A., Norton, S. and Joseph, N.L. (2015), “The emergence of integrated private
               reporting”, Meditari Accountancy Research, Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 28-61.
        Barter, N. (2015), “Natural capital: dollars and cents/dollars and sense”, Sustainability Accounting,
               Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 366-373.
        Berrone, P., Gelabert, L. and Fosfuri, A. (2009), “The impact of symbolic and substantive actions
               of environmental legitimacy”, Working Paper Business School, University of Navarra.
        Boesso, G. and Kumar, K. (2007), “Drivers of corporate voluntary disclosure: a framework and
               empirical evidence from Italy and the United States”, Accounting, Auditing &
               Accountability Journal, Vol. 20 No. 2, pp. 269-296.
        Brennan, N.M., Guillamon-Saorin, E. and Aileen Pierce, A. (2009), “Impression management:
               developing and illustrating a scheme of analysis for narrative disclosures – a
               methodological note”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 22 No. 5,
               pp. 789-832.
        Brown, J. and Dillard, J. (2014), “Integrated reporting: on the need for broadening out and opening
               up”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7, pp. 1120-1156.
        Coulson, A.B., Adams, C., Nugent, M. and Haynes, K. (2015), “Exploring metaphors of capitals and
               the framing of multiple capitals: challenges and opportunities for IR”, Sustainability
               Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 290-314.
        de Villiers, C., Rinaldi, L. and Unerman, J. (2014), “Integrated reporting: insights, gaps and an
               agenda for future research”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7,
               pp. 1042-1067.
        de Villiers, C. and van Staden, C.J. (2006), “Can less environmental disclosure have a legitimizing
               effect? Evidence from Africa”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 31 No. 8,
               pp. 763-781.
Deegan, C., Rankin, M. and Voght, P. (2000), “Firms’ disclosure reactions to major social incidents:   The trend of
        Australian evidence”, Accounting Forum, Vol. 24 No. 1, pp. 101-130.
                                                                                                        integrated
Eccles, R.G. and Armbrester, K. (2011), “Integrated reporting in the cloud”, IESE Insight, Vol. 8
        No. 1, pp. 13-20.
                                                                                                         reporting
Ernst & Young (2013), EY’s Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2013: A Survey of
                                                                                                           practice
        Integrated Reports from South Africa’s Top 100 JSE Listed Companies and Top 10 State
        Owned Companies, Ernst & Young Global Limited, London.                                                219
Ernst & Young (2014), EY’s Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2014: A Survey of
        Integrated Reports from South Africa’s Top 100 JSE-Listed Companies and Top 10
        State-Owned Companies, Ernst & Young Global Limited, London.
Flower, J. (2015), “The international integrated reporting council: a story of failure”, Critical
        Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 27, pp. 1-17.
Gray, R., Kouhy, R. and Lavers, S. (1995), “Corporate social and environmental reporting: a review
        of the literature and a longitudinal study of UK disclosure”, Accounting, Auditing &
        Accountability Journal, Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 47-77.
Guthrie, J. and Parker, L.D. (1989), “Corporate social reporting: a rebuttal of legitimacy theory”,
        Accounting and Business Research, Vol. 19 No. 76, pp. 343-352.
Guthrie, J. and Parker, L.D. (1990), “Corporate social disclosure practice: a comparative
        international analysis”, Advances in Public Interest Accounting, Vol. 3, pp. 159-175.
Guthrie, J. and Petty, R. (2000), “Intellectual capital: Australian annual reporting practices”,
        Journal of Intellectual Capital, Vol. 1 No. 3, pp. 241-251.
Haller, A. and van Staden, C. (2014), “The value added statement – an appropriate instrument for
        integrated reporting”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7,
        pp. 1190-1216.
Higgins, C., Stubbs, W. and Love, T. (2014), “Walking the talk(s): organisational narratives of
        integrated reporting”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7,
        pp. 1090-1119.
Hybels, R.C. (1995), “On legitimacy, legitimation, and organizations: a critical review and
        integrative theoretical model”, Academy of Management Journal, pp. 241-245.
Integrated Reporting Committee (IRC) of South Africa (2011), “Framework for integrated
        reporting and the integrated report”, Discussion Paper.
Integrated Reporting Committee (IRC) of South Africa (2015), “Reporting outcomes: an
        information paper”, Discussion Paper.
International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) (2011), “Towards integrated reporting:
        communicating value in the 21st century”, Discussion Paper, London.
International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) (2013a), The International Integrated Reporting
        Framework, International Integrated Reporting Committee (IIRC), London.
International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) (2013b), Basis for Conclusions, International
        Integrated Reporting Committee (IIRC), London.
International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) (2013c), Summary of Significant Issues,
        International Integrated Reporting Committee (IIRC), London.
King III (2009), “King report on Governance for South Africa”, King Code of Governance
        Principles Series.
Krippendorff, K. (1980), Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology, Sage, London.
Li, J., Pike, R. and Haniffa, R. (2008), “Intellectual capital disclosure and corporate governance
        structure in UK firms”, Accounting and Business Research, Vol. 38 No. 2, pp. 137-159.
SAMPJ   Lindblom, C.K. (2004), “The implications of organizational legitimacy for corporate social
               performance and disclosure”, paper presented at Critical Perspectives Conference, New
7,2            York, NY.
        Milne, M.J. and Adler, R.W. (1999), “Exploring the reliability of social and environmental
               disclosures content analysis”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 12 No. 2,
               pp. 237-256.
220     Milne, M.J. and Gray, R. (2013), “W(h)ither ecology? The triple bottom line, the global reporting
               initiative, and corporate sustainability reporting” Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 118,
               pp. 13-29.
        O’Donovan, G. (2002), “Environmental disclosures in the annual report: extending the
               applicability and predictive power of legitimacy theory”, Accounting, Auditing &
               Accountability Journal, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 344-371.
        Oliver, C. (1991), “Strategic responses to institutional processes”, Academy of Management
               Review, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 145-179.
        PwC (2013), “The value creation journey: a survey of JSE Top-40 companies’ integrated reports”,
               available at: www.pwc.co.za/en/assets/pdf/integrated-reporting-august-2013.pdf (accessed
               2 April 2015).
        Robertson, F.A. and Samy, M. (2015), “Factors affecting the diffusion of integrated reporting – a
               UK FTSE 100 perspective”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal,
               Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 190-223.
        Setia, N., Abhayawansa, S., Joshi, M. and Huynh, A.V. (2015), “Integrated reporting in South
               Africa: some initial evidence”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal,
               Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 397-424.
        Simnett, R. and Huggins, A.L. (2015), “Integrated reporting and assurance: where can research add
               value?”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 29-53.
        Solomon, J. and Maroun, W. (2012), Integrated Reporting: the Influence of King III on Social,
               Ethical and Environmental Reporting, The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants,
               London.
        Soobaroyen, T. and Ntim, C.G. (2013), “Social and environmental accounting as symbolic and
               substantive means of legitimation: the case of HIV/AIDS reporting in South Africa”,
               Accounting Forum, Vol. 37, pp. 92-109.
        Stemler, S. (2001), “An overview of content analysis”, Practical Assessment, Research &
               Evaluation, Vol. 7 No. 17, available at: http://PAREonline.net/getvn.asp?v⫽7&n⫽17
               (accessed 10 April 2015).
        Stent, W. and Dowler, T. (2015), “Early assessments of the gap between integrated reporting and
               current corporate reporting”, Meditari Accountancy Research, Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 92-117.
        Steyn, M. (2014), “Organisational benefits and implementation challenges of mandatory
               integrated reporting”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 5
               No. 4, pp. 476-503.
        Stubbs, W., Colin Higgins, C., Milne, M. and Hems, L. (2014), “Financial capital providers’
               perceptions of integrated reporting”, Working Paper, available at: http://ssrn.com/
               abstract⫽2473426
        Stubbs, W. and Higgins, C. (2014), “Integrated reporting and internal mechanisms of change”,
               Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7, pp. 1068-1089.
        Suchman, M.C. (1995), “Managing legitimacy: strategic and institutional approaches”, Academy of
               Management Review, Vol. 20 No. 3, pp. 571-610.
Tregidga, H., Milne, M. and Lehman, G. (2012), “Analyzing the quality, meaning and                    The trend of
      accountability of organizational reporting and communication: directions for future
      research”, Accounting Forum, Vol. 36, pp. 223-230.                                               integrated
Unerman, J. (2000), “Methodological issues: reflections on quantification in corporate social           reporting
      reporting content analysis”, Accounting Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 13 No. 5,           practice
      pp. 667-680.
Van Bommel, K. (2014), “Towards a legitimate compromise? An exploration of integrated                        221
      reporting in the Netherlands”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7,
      pp. 1157-1189.
van Zyl, A.S. (2013), “Sustainability and integrated reporting in the South African Corporate
      Sector”, International Business & Economics Research Journal, Vol. 12 No. 8, pp. 903-926.
Vourvachis, P., Woodward, T., Woodward, D.G. and Patten, D.M. (2016), “CSR disclosure in
      response to major airline accidents: a legitimacy-based exploration”, Sustainability
      Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 7 No. 1.
West, A. (2006), “Theorising South Africa’s corporate governance”, Journal of Business Ethics,
      Vol. 68 No. 4, pp. 433-448.
Wild, S. and van Staden, C. (2013), “Integrated reporting: an initial analysis of early reporters”,
      paper presented at the Massey University Accounting Research Seminar, Auckland.
Williams, S.J. and Adams, C.A. (2013), “Moral accounting? Employee disclosures from a
      stakeholder accountability perspective”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal,
      Vol. 26 No. 3, pp. 449-495.
Wiseman, J. (1982), “An evaluation of environmental disclosures made in corporate annual
      reports”, Accounting, Organisations and Society, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 53-63.
SAMPJ                  Appendix
7,2
                                                                                     Year 2011            Year 2012            Year 2012
                                                                                   No. of               No. of               No. of
                       No.    IR checklist                                       companies     (%)    companies     (%)    companies     (%)

222                    Strategic focus and future orientation
                        1     Connecting strategy to the wider value creation       78        95.12      81        98.78      82       100
                        2     Lessons from past experiences in determining          24        29.27      28        34.15      33        40.24
                              future strategic directions
                        3     Basis of preparation of the IAR                       71        86.59      69        84.15      68        82.93
                        4     Commitment to continuous integrated thinking          59        71.95      56        68.29      57        69.51
                              and reporting
                        5     Major Challenges                                      80        97.56      81        98.78      81        98.78
                        6     Disappointments                                       59        71.95      64        78.05      63        76.83
                        7     Achievements during the year                          58        70.73      66        80.49      72        87.8
                        8     Improvements made during the year                     82       100         81        98.78      82       100

                       Connectivity of information
                        9    A holistic picture of the combination,                 14        17.07      19        23.17      31        37.8
                             interrelatedness and dependencies between the
                             factors that affect a firm’s ability to create
                             value over time
                       10    Connecting sustainability information to the           74        90.24      75        91.46      74        90.24
                             company’s financial statements
                       11    Changes in strategy when new risks and                 20        24.39      28        34.15      34        41.46
                             opportunities are identified or performance is
                             not as expected
                       12    Aligning the business model to changes in the          31        37.8       52        63.41      61        74.39
                             business environment
                       13    An analysis of the past, present and future            82       100         82       100         82       100
                       14    The interdependencies and trade-offs between            3         3.66       8         9.76      19        23.17
                             the capitals: financial, manufactured,
                             intellectual, human, social and relationship and
                             natural
                       15    Information on expected revenue growth or              80        97.56      80        97.56      80        97.56
                             market share or investment in human
                             resources
                       16    Connecting information in the integrated report        28        34.15      37        45.12      40        48.78
                             to information in the ‘organisation’s other
                             communication channels

                       Stakeholder relationships
                       17    Providing insights into the nature and quality         78        95.12      79        96.34      80        97.56
                             of the ‘organisation’s relationships with its key
                             stakeholders
                       18    Info the organisation receives from                    49        59.76      57        69.51      56        68.29
                             stakeholders including economic,
                             environmental and social issues
                       19    Frequency of engagement with stakeholders              53        64.63      58        70.73      57        69.51
                             (e.g., day-to-day liaison with customers and
                             suppliers)
                       20    Communication channels with stakeholders               62        75.61      68        82.93      67        81.71
                       21    Disclosure of how key stakeholders’ legitimate         75        91.46      78        95.12      79        96.34
Table AI.                    needs and interests are understood, taken into
Integrated reporting         account and responded
checklist                                                                                                                          (continued)
                                                                Year 2011            Year 2012            Year 2012
                                                                                                                            The trend of
                                                              No. of               No. of               No. of               integrated
No.    IR checklist                                         companies     (%)    companies     (%)    companies     (%)
                                                                                                                              reporting
22     Taking stewardship and responsibility for the           68        82.93      72        87.8       75        91.46        practice
       effects of ‘organisation’s activities and
       operations

Materiality                                                                                                                        223
23    Disclosure of information about matters that             74        90.24      78        95.12      78        95.12
      substantively affect the ‘organisation’s ability
      to create value
24    The materiality determination process                    27        32.93      41        50         48        58.54
25    Identification, prioritisation and approval of           17        20.73      22        26.83      21        25.61
      material issues
26    Interrelationships between material issues                3         3.66       7         8.54       8         9.76
27    Process of determining information to disclose           13        15.85      16        19.51      17        20.73
      (internal and external parties)
28    Reporting boundary (are employees, customers,            77        93.9       77        93.9       77        93.9
      suppliers, business partners, communities and
      others)
29    Financial reporting entity (includes                     80        97.56      80        97.56      80        97.56
      subsidiaries’, joint ventures’ and associates’
      transactions and related events)

Risk management practices
30    Discussion of risk management practices in               81        98.78      82       100         82       100
      place
31    The presence of a risk management                        46        56.1       53        64.63      55        67.07
      strategy/policy
32    The role of board in risk management practices           54        65.85      63        76.83      69        84.15
      and policy development
33    The role of the internal audit function in RM            61        74.39      69        84.15      68        82.93
      process-does it offer assurances?
34    The views of the board on the RM process-its             35        42.68      46        56.1       57        69.51
      satisfaction
35    Risk mitigation                                          69        84.15      74        90.24      75        91.46
36    Improvements in risk and governance                      68        82.93      69        84.15      71        86.59
      framework

Conciseness
37    Value-added statement                                    56        68.29      55        67.07      57        69.51
38    Includes sufficient context to understand the            70        85.37      74        90.24      74        90.24
      ‘organisation’s strategy, governance,
      performance and prospects without being
      burdened with less relevant information
39    Follows a logical structure and includes                 67        81.71      69        84.15      75        91.46
      internal cross-references as appropriate to limit
      repetition
40    Favours plain language over the use of jargon            82       100         82       100         82       100
      or highly technical terminology
41    Avoids highly generic disclosures, often                 81        98.78      81        98.78      82       100
      referred to as “boilerplate”, that are not specific
      to the organisation
                                                                                                              (continued)       Table AI.
SAMPJ                                                                    Year 2011            Year 2012            Year 2012
7,2                                                                    No. of               No. of               No. of
            No.   IR checklist                                       companies     (%)    companies     (%)    companies     (%)

            Reliability and completeness
            42     An integrated reporting steering committee            7        8.537       8        9.756       7        8.537
            43     Discussion of who approves the integrated            60       73.17       67       81.71       71       86.59
224                report
            44     Declaring inclusion of all material matters,         48       58.54       50       60.98       61       74.39
                   both positive and negative, in a balanced way
                   and without material error
            45     Disclosing information about robust internal         64       78.05       68       82.93       69       84.15
                   control and reporting systems, stakeholder
                   engagement, internal audit or similar functions
                   and independent, external assurance
            46     Statement on the assessment of the                   26       31.71       35       42.68       40       48.78
                   independence of the independent non-executive
                   directors
            47     Maintaining an audit trail when preparing an         39       47.56       50       60.98       53       64.63
                   integrated report to ensure information is
                   sufficiently reliable to be included in the IR
            48     Relevant disclosures when material                    1        1.22        5        6.098       3        3.659
                   information is omitted (e.g. because of the
                   unavailability of reliable data)
            49     Balanced: has no bias in the selection or            39       47.56       44       53.66       50       60.98
                   presentation of information in the IAR

            Consistency, comparability and assurances
            50    Assurances in non-financial information by            37       45.12       48       58.54       51       62.2
                  external parties
            51    The info in the report is presented on a              77       93.9        79       96.34       80       97.56
                  consistent basis over time (otherwise explain
                  the reasons for significant changes)
            52    Whether or not the audit committee oversees           64       78.05       63       76.83       62       75.61
                  and provides any assurances to the integrated
Table AI.         report



            Corresponding author
            Abdifatah Ahmed Haji can be contacted at: fitka7@hotmail.com




            For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
            www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
            Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
