                      The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
                      www.emeraldinsight.com/1176-6093.htm




   Exploring the implications of                                                                                         Integrated
                                                                                                                          reporting
     integrated reporting on
 organisational reporting practice
                 Evidence from highly regarded                                                                                         415
                      integrated reporters                                                                            Received 16 July 2015
                                                                                                                    Revised 15 January 2016
          Abdifatah Ahmed Haji and Dewan Mahboob Hossain                                                                        15 June 2016
   Department of Accounting, International Islamic University Malaysia,                                               Accepted 26 July 2016

                       Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia


Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to examine “how” the adoption of integrated reporting (IR), and
the embedded multiple capitals framework, has influenced organisational reporting practice. In
particular, the paper examines how companies report and integrate multiple capitals in various
organisational reporting channels following the introduction of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in
South Africa.
Design/methodology/approach – Using a qualitative case study approach based on discourse
analysis, this paper examines various organisational reports including integrated reports, standalone
sustainability reports, websites and other online materials of highly regarded, award-winning,
integrated reporters in South Africa over a four-year period (2011-2014), following the introduction of IR
requirement. The authors draw five impression management techniques, namely, rhetorical
manipulation, thematic manipulation, selectivity, emphasis in visual presentation and performance
comparisons to explain disclosure and integration of multiple capitals.
Findings – The authors find that companies are increasingly conforming to reporting language
espoused in existing IR guidelines and multiple capital frameworks over time. For instance, it is found
that the research cases have increasingly used specific grammars in existing IR guidelines such as
“capitals” and “material” issues, with companies acknowledging the “interdependencies” and
“trade-offs” between multiple capitals. Companies have also started to recognise that the capitals are
subject to “increases, decreases, and transformations” over time. However, the disclosures are generic,
rather than company-specific, and lack substance, often framed in synthetic charming aimed to
showcase adoption of IR practice. In addition, the current discourse on multiple capital disclosures is
one of the defending, even promoting, organisational reputation, rather than recognising how
organisational actions, or inactions, impact multiple capitals. The paper concludes that the emerging IR
practice, and the embedded multiple capital framework, has not really improved the substance of
organisational reports.
Practical implications – The results of this study have a number of implications for regulatory
authorities, public and private sector organisations as well as academic researchers. For regulatory
authorities, the results inform relevant regulatory authorities how IR practice is taking shape over time,
particularly within the context of a regulatory setting. Second, the empirical analyses, which focused on
highly regarded, award-wining, integrated reporters, draw the attention of regulatory bodies as well as
                                                                                                                          Qualitative Research in
The authors are sincerely grateful to two anonymous reviewers of this Journal for many insightful                    Accounting & Management
                                                                                                                               Vol. 13 No. 4, 2016
comments in the development of this paper. They also appreciate the encouragement and prompt                                          pp. 415-444
feedback from the editors of this Journal, Professor John Burns and Professor Deryl Northcott,                  © Emerald Group Publishing Limited
                                                                                                                                        1176-6093
throughout the review process. All remaining errors are a result of their own work.                              DOI 10.1108/QRAM-07-2015-0065
QRAM   users of corporate reports to concerns related to a growing number of rating agencies of organisational
       reports. Finally, for academic researchers, the theoretical implications of this study is that, given the
13,4   pervasive use of multiple impression management techniques in various organisational reports, the
       authors support the notion that corporate disclosure practices should be examined through the lens of
       multiple theoretical perspectives to enhance our understanding of the nature of organisational reporting
       practice.
416    Originality/value – This study provides a more focused preliminary empirical account of the
       implications of IR practice, and the embedded multiple capital frameworks, on the quality of
       organisational reporting practice following the adoption of mandatory IR requirement in South Africa.
       Keywords South Africa, Value creation, Integrated reporting, Multiple capitals,
       Discourse analyses, Impression management theory
       Paper type Research paper


       1. Introduction
       Organisational reporting practice continues to evolve from traditional financial
       reporting to environmental, social and governance considerations to, more recently,
       integrated reporting (IR) (King III, 2009; de Villiers et al., 2014). Despite the changing
       landscape of the organisational reporting practice over the past four decades or so, the
       substance of organisational reports has largely remained the same, with companies
       producing a set of monotonous reports imbued with empty sustainability rhetoric
       (Milne and Gray, 2013; Williams and Adams, 2013). The IR agenda, which is highly
       advocated in South Africa’s King III Code of Corporate Governance (2009) – and more
       recently King IV (2016) – as well as by the International Integrated Reporting Council
       (IIRC), promises to bring “shifts” in corporate reporting practice (IIRC, 2013a; Coulson
       et al., 2015). In so doing, the IR agenda builds on prior developments in organisational
       reporting theory and practice, with a goal to bring together material financial and
       non-financial information through the lens of multiple capitals (i.e. financial,
       manufactured, intellectual, human, social and relationship and natural capital) (IIRC,
       2013a). In short, the IR initiative is espoused as a “synthesis” of prior developments in
       various organisational reporting strands: triple bottom line and sustainability reporting
       being the antithesis of traditional financial reporting thesis. An increasing number of
       companies have so far adopted IR practice, with the latest survey reporting that over
       1,000 companies worldwide have implemented IR (IIRC, 2016).
           However, a number of academic scholars are critical about the value of IR proposals,
       in particular, the continued emphasis on “value to investors” and business case
       approach as well as relegation of less powerful stakeholder groups in current IIRC
       proposals (Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014). Milne and Gray (2013, p. 20),
       for instance, view the IIRC’s proposal as “a masterpiece of obfuscation and avoidance of
       any recognition of the prior 40 years of [social and environmental] research and
       experimentation” which, despite its claims for sustainable development, is “exclusively
       investor focused and has nothing substantive about either accountability or
       sustainability”. Consistent with this view, early empirical studies document that the
       adoption of IR practice has not really improved the substance of organisational reports
       (Wild and van Staden, 2013; Melloni, 2015), even in the context of mandatory
       environment (Solomon and Maroun, 2012; Setia et al., 2015; IIRC, 2016; Ahmed Haji and
       Anifowose, 2016).
   Mindful of the division within academia on the actual worth of the emerging IR            Integrated
agenda, the objective of this study is to examine how the adoption of IR practice, and the    reporting
embedded multiple capitals framework, has influenced organisational reporting
practice. In particular, we first examine how highly regarded, award-winning, South
African companies report and integrate multiple capitals in various organisational
reporting channels following the introduction of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in
South Africa. Existing research has so far explored “whether” and to “what” extent the            417
multiple capitals are reported (Solomon and Maroun, 2012; Wild and van Staden, 2013;
Setia et al., 2015). By way of thematic-based discourse analyses of various
organisational reporting channels (e.g. integrated reports, standalone sustainability
reports, websites and other online materials), this study explores “how” companies
report and integrate multiple capitals following the adoption of IR practice. Second,
drawing from five impression management techniques, namely, rhetorical
manipulation, thematic manipulation, selectivity, emphasis in visual presentation and
performance comparisons (Brennan et al., 2009), we analyse the linguistic and semiotic
choices underpinning multiple capital disclosures. In so doing, we closely examine
specific grammars and emerging themes on multiple capital disclosures. Third, we
explore how companies link and report multiple capitals within the context of “material”
issues and value creation/destruction process. Given the underlined interdependencies
and potential trade-offs between multiple capitals in existing IR guidelines, we explore
how companies discuss organisational value creation/destruction discourses within the
context of multiple capitals following the adoption of IR practice.
   Our findings indicate that companies are increasingly conforming to reporting
language espoused in existing IR guidelines and multiple capital frameworks over time
(Forum for the Future, 2009; IIRC, 2013a). For instance, we find that the research cases
have increasingly used specific grammars in existing IR guidelines such as “capitals”
and “material” issues, with companies acknowledging the “interdependencies” and
“trade-offs” between multiple capitals. Companies have also started to recognise that the
capitals are subjected to “increases, decreases, and transformations” over time.
However, upon closer inspection, the disclosures are generic, rather than
company-specific, and lack substance, often framed in synthetic charming aimed to
showcase adoption of IR practice. In essence, there is a palpable disintegration between
different capitals, or components of a capital in the integrated reports as well as other
reporting platforms. In addition, the current discourse on multiple capital disclosures is
one of the defending, even promoting, organisational reputation, rather than
recognising how organisational actions, or inactions, impact multiple capitals,
particularly capitals of intrinsic value. Instead, companies continue to use multiple
impression management techniques to exaggerate positive outcomes while obscuring,
even dismissing, negative trade-offs between the capitals. Finally, we observe
disclosure of multiple capitals is largely limited to the integrated reports and is
uncommon in other organisational reporting channels. Thus, the multiple capitals
framework is not viewed as an overall organisational reporting philosophy but is seen
as a specific metaphor in integrated reports. We conclude that, despite some cursory
references to multiple capitals and wider value creation, the adoption of IR practice, and
the embedded multiple capitals framework, has not really improved the substance of
organisational reports.
QRAM       This study contributes to organisational reporting literature in several ways. First, at
13,4   this early stage of the IR agenda, empirical research is limited. We provide initial
       empirical account of how (if at all) IR has shaped organisational reporting practice,
       particularly within the context of highly regarded integrated reporters. Second, the
       extant IR literature has so far explored “whether” and “what” aspects of IR practice
       (Wild and van Staden, 2013; Setia et al., 2015). Using a qualitative case study approach,
418    this study adds to existing literature by examining “how” multiple capitals are reported
       and integrated in various organisational reporting platforms. Third, we provide
       evidence that companies, despite calls to balance “positive” and “negative” disclosures
       in IR guidelines (King III, 2009; IIRC, 2013a), continue to use multiple impression
       management techniques to exaggerate positive information while ignoring negative
       outcomes following the adoption of IR practice. Therefore, the findings of this study
       contribute to impression management theory. Unlike prior studies, which have largely
       used impression management theory to explain less regulated narrative disclosures
       (Neu et al., 1998; Brennan et al., 2009), we explore the implications of IR practice on
       organisational reporting practice through the lens of impression management theory. It
       is our view that the nature of integrated reports, which in essence combine both highly
       and less regulated disclosures, presents unique setting to examine how companies use
       impression management strategies, particularly within the context of highly regarded
       integrated reporters in a mandatory context. Finally, in departure from prior studies,
       which have mainly focused on integrated reports, this study examines various reporting
       channels to explore the implications of IR, and the embedded multiple capitals,
       frameworks on organisational reporting practice.
           The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The ensuing section reviews
       relevant IR studies and highlights gaps in the literature. Next, we discuss current
       multiple capitals frameworks and research theory in Section 3. Section 4 details research
       methods while the penultimate section presents the research findings. Section 6
       concludes the paper with discussion of research implications and suggestions for future
       research directions.

       2. Literature review
       IR research is still at “embryonic” stage (de Villiers et al., 2014). However, the subject has
       received, and continues to receive, significant attention from academic researchers as
       well as professional bodies (PwC, 2013; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Ernst and Young,
       2013, 2014; Higgins et al., 2014; Veltri and Silvestri, 2015; Setia et al., 2015).
       Understandably at this early stage, majority of the extant IR literature is normative in
       nature (Abeysekera, 2013; de Villiers et al., 2014; Brown and Dillard, 2014; Haller and
       van Staden, 2014; Flower, 2015; Adams, 2015).
          One stream of the normative studies promotes specific reporting templates and
       guideposts that incorporate the central ideas of existing IR guidelines (Abeysekera,
       2013; Haller and van Staden, 2014; Adams, 2015). Such reporting templates and
       guideposts include, inter alia, valued-added statements and use of narratives to
       conceptualise and establish linkages between financial and non-financial information
       (Abeysekera, 2013; Haller and van Staden, 2014). Within the normative studies, there is
       also an attempt to highlight the historical background of IR initiative and its global
       footprint (de Villiers et al., 2014). These useful insights notwithstanding, the normative
       studies provide limited or no empirical account of IR practice.
    Another stream of the normative studies on IR is critical about the actual worth of the   Integrated
IR agenda, in particular, its stated aim, scope and purported benefits (Brown and              reporting
Dillard, 2014; Flower, 2015), while other academic scholars welcome the IR initiative
(Adams, 2015; Coulson et al., 2015). To some, IR is a “new paradigm” which has the
potential to shape and improve organisational reporting practice (Adams, 2015; Coulson
et al., 2015). To others, it is maybe a new paradigm, popular even, but a wrong paradigm
(Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014; Flower, 2015). The criticisms of IR                419
mainly focus on current IR proposals’ “value to investors” emphasis and the continued
advocacy of a business case approach (Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014;
Flower, 2015), given the primary aim of an integrated report is to “explain to providers
of financial capital how an organisation creates value over time” (IIRC, 2013a, p. 4). The
critics maintain that IR, compared to prior organisational reporting initiatives (e.g.
global reporting initiative [GRI]), is “remarkably regressive” (Milne and Gray, 2013,
2013, p. 25) and follows a “limited and one-sided approach” (Brown and Dillard, 2014,
p. 1120). Based on the prior organisational reporting experience, particularly
sustainability and triple bottom line reporting, where companies produce a set of
symbolic reports with little or no substantive reporting, it is the view of several
accounting scholars that IR proposals will only perpetuate current corporate reporting
empty rhetoric (Milne and Gray, 2013; Flower, 2015).
    In defence, the advocates of IR maintain that the criticisms are too much too early
(Adams, 2015), and the mission is on course to achieve its aims (Gleeson-White, 2014).
Coulson et al. (2015, p. 290), for instance, argue that the IR agenda is a “shift from a
‘financial capital market system’ to an ‘inclusive capital market system’ through
recognition of multiple capitals and IR and thinking”. The proponents admit that there
is always room for improvement, and that the IR frameworks will build on feedback
from various stakeholder groups including the business community, users of
information, academics and other relevant publics. The next section reviews early
empirical studies on IR practice.

2.1 Emerging empirical studies
A growing number of empirical studies have explored IR practice internationally (PwC,
2013; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Higgins et al., 2014; Stubbs and Higgins, 2014; Veltri
and Silvestri, 2015; Robertson and Samy, 2015; Ahmed Haji and Anifowose, 2016). The
empirical studies have mainly taken two approaches to investigate IR practice:
  (1) a qualitative approach, which undertakes an in-depth analysis; and
  (2) a content analyses approach, based on cross-sectional analyses of annual
       (integrated) reports.

Using in-depth interviews and case study research, the qualitative studies engage with
early integrated reporters as well as key stakeholder groups (e.g. investors) to explore
how IR is perceived and conceptualised (Stubbs et al., 2014; Higgins et al., 2014; Stubbs
and Higgins, 2014; Robertson and Samy, 2015). This line of research reports that there is
a “gap” between the desired IR (as prescribed in existing IR guidelines) and the actual
practice (Stubbs et al., 2014; Higgins et al., 2014; Stubbs and Higgins, 2014; Robertson
and Samy, 2015). For instance, Stubbs et al. (2014) observe, through interviews, that
there is a significant gap between the information supplied by Australian firms and
information required by investors. Similarly, Higgins et al. (2014), who interviewed 23
QRAM   managers of early adopting Australian firms, submit that managers conceptualise IR as
13,4   a “strategic story-telling” and “about meeting expectation”. In addition, Steyn (2014), in
       the South African context, finds that the primary motive to adopt IR is to enhance
       corporate “reputation” and organisational legitimacy rather than improve corporate
       accountability. Stubbs and Higgins (2014), again in Australia, share similar
       observations from their interviews with Australian sustainability, finance and
420    communication managers. The authors argue that the adoption of IR, which is just
       incremental rather than radical, “has not necessarily stimulated new innovations in
       disclosure mechanisms” (Stubbs and Higgins, 2014, p. 1068). In short, the empirical
       findings indicate that current IR practice is motivated by considerations other than
       organisational accountability and sustainability.
           By way of content analyses, a growing number of empirical studies have examined
       specific, or multiple, capital disclosure practices in integrated reports following the
       adoption of IR practice (Solomon and Maroun, 2012; PwC, 2013; Wild and van Staden,
       2013; Veltri and Silvestri, 2015; Setia et al., 2015; Melloni, 2015). Using a sample of
       worldwide companies included in the pilot program of IIRC, Wild and van Staden (2013)
       and Melloni (2015) have explored multiple capital disclosure practices in the integrated
       reports. Wild and van Staden (2013) found that companies provide general and soft
       disclosures as opposed to hard and verifiable information, with majority of the
       companies reporting only four of the capitals, namely, financial, human, natural and
       social capitals. Similarly, Melloni (2015) observed that companies provide limited
       quantitative and forward-looking information, with relational capital dominating the
       integrated reports of companies included in the pilot program of IIRC.
           In the South African context, both Solomon and Maroun (2012) and Setia et al. (2015),
       who have examined corporate disclosure practices before and after the adoption of IR
       practice in South Africa, found a significant increase in the amount of disclosures
       following the implementation of IR practice. More recently, Ahmed Haji and Anifowose
       (2016) have examined the trend of IR practice of South African companies. The authors
       found a significant increase in the application of IR guidelines by South African
       companies. However, the authors conclude that “the current IR practice [in South Africa]
       is largely ceremonial in nature aimed to acquire organisational legitimacy” (Ahmed Haji
       and Anifowose, 2016, p. 192). In summary, studies in South Africa, consistent with
       international studies (Wild and van Staden, 2013; Melloni, 2015), observe that integrated
       reporters follow the form rather the substance of existing IR guidelines (Veltri and
       Silvestri, 2015). In particular, the integrated reports remain “historical” as opposed to
       “forward-looking”, and the contents are still presented in “silos” (PwC, 2013).
           The current study addresses three gaps in the existing literature. First, the extant
       literature has so far examined “whether” and “what” aspects of IR practice (Solomon and
       Maroun, 2012; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Veltri and Silvestri, 2015; Setia et al., 2015). In
       departure from prior studies, this study provides a more focused assessment, than has
       previously been undertaken, on specific approaches companies use to report “multiple
       capitals” following the introduction of a mandatory IR requirement in South Africa. In
       particular, we examine “how” companies report and integrate multiple capitals in the
       context of organisational value creation/destruction narratives. Second, drawing from
       multiple impression management techniques, we explore, through discourse analyses,
       specific grammars used to report the emerging multiple capitals. In essence, we go
       beyond from “what” is disclosed to “how” it is disclosed. Our intention is to reveal the
actual nature of IR, and the embedded multiple capital disclosures, particularly within              Integrated
the context of highly regarded integrated reporters. Third, existing empirical studies                reporting
have largely focused only on annual integrated reports to explore organisational
reporting practices following the adoption of IR practice (Solomon and Maroun, 2012;
Veltri and Silvestri, 2015; Setia et al., 2015; Ahmed Haji and Anifowose, 2016). However,
the IR agenda, and the embedded integrated thinking, is promoted as a wider
organisational reporting philosophy which is supposed to bring “shift” in the traditional                 421
silo reporting and integrate various organisational reporting platforms (IIRC, 2013a).
This study, therefore, examines various organisational reporting channels including
integrated reports, standalone sustainability reports, websites, press releases and other
online materials to observe how the adoption of IR has influenced organisational
reporting practice.

3. Research framework
3.1 Multiple capitals frameworks
The IIRC framework builds on recent projects that have proposed multiple capital
frameworks, in particular Sigma Project (2003) and Forum for the Future (2009), which
have initially identified five capitals (natural, social, human, manufactured and financial
capital). The IIRC framework proposes six capitals, adding intellectual capital to
existing multiple capital proposals (Coulson et al., 2015). These proposals all recognise
that organisations create value by using and creating broad base of multiple capitals. In
particular, the proposed IIRC framework encourages integrated reporters to show
interdependencies and trade-offs between the capitals in communicating organisational
value creation to promote “accountability and stewardship for the broad base of capitals
[…] and promote understanding of their interdependencies” (IIRC 2013a, p. 2). The
natural process is that the capitals are subject to increases, decreases and
transformations over the course of organisational reporting period, and so companies
are required to report changes in the capitals as well as potential trade-offs between
them. For instance, a decrease in the financial capital of a firm could have been the result
of significant investments in human capital, intellectual capital and/or investments in
renewable energy sources. In this case, the financial capital has been transformed into
other capitals of intrinsic value:
   The capitals are stocks of value that are increased, decreased or transformed through the
   activities and outputs of the organization. For example, an organization’s financial capital is
   increased when it makes a profit, and the quality of its human capital is improved when
   employees become better trained (IIRC, 2013a, p. 11).
One benefit of the proposed multiple capitals framework is that companies are able to
consider and communicate how they create/ destroy “value” beyond economic value
(Gleeson-White, 2014; Coulson et al., 2015). However, the danger is that companies could
misunderstand the nature of different capitals, potentially monetising capitals of
intrinsic value, rather than economic value, such as human, social and natural resources
(Barter, 2015). Therefore, given the term capital is predominantly conceptualised as
money and other financial assets by accountants, use of the “capitals” metaphor can be
problematic, potentially relegating human and natural resources of intrinsic value to
money and financial assets (Barter, 2015; Coulson et al., 2015). Hence, while the multiple
capitals approach is potentially useful, there is a need to draw a clear distinction
between capitals of intrinsic value, as represented by social, human and natural capitals,
QRAM   and capitals of economic value such as financial, intellectual and manufactured capitals
13,4   to avoid continuation of economic hegemony (Coulson et al., 2015).
           Nonetheless, the multiple capitals framework continues to receive a growing
       recognition from academic researchers (Gleeson-White, 2014; Setia et al., 2015; Coulson
       et al., 2015; Barter, 2015), practitioners (McElroy and Thomas, 2015) and the business
       community. In South Africa, an increasing number of companies such as Sasol, Royal
422    Bafokeng Platinum Ltd, Standard Bank Group Ltd and Truworths International Ltd
       have adopted the multiple capitals framework in their integrated reports.
       Internationally, several companies including Coca-Cola HBC, Lawson, Banca Fideuram,
       Atlantia and Sime Darby (to name but only a few) are also embracing the capitals
       framework (Coulson et al., 2015). These developments, notwithstanding, early empirical
       studies show that multiple capital disclosures are ceremonial rather than substantive
       (Setia et al., 2015; Ahmed Haji and Anifowose, 2016), as the integrated reports “construct
       a discourse imbued with stakeholder accountability rhetoric” (Solomon and Maroun,
       2012, p. 51). However, given the newness of IR practice, little is still known about the
       implications of IR, and the embedded multiple capitals frameworks, on organisational
       reporting practice. Building on these developments, we examine, through discourse
       analyses, “how” highly regarded, award-winning South African companies report and
       integrate multiple capitals in various organisational reporting channels. In so doing, we
       draw from impression management theory to explain organisational reporting practice
       following the introduction of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in South Africa. The
       ensuing section further discusses the research theory.

       3.2 Impression management theory
       Impression management theory, which has its roots in social psychology literatures,
       propounds that individuals and organisations attempt to control the perceptions of
       others to gain specific advantage. In particular, impression management is defined as
       the “conscious or unconscious attempt to control images that are projected in real or
       imagined social interactions” (Schlenker, 1980, p. 6). Accounting researchers have
       predominantly used impression management theory to explain organisational reporting
       practice (Neu et al., 1998; Brennan et al., 2009; Melloni, 2015). Brennan et al. (2009), in
       their review, have identified seven impression management approaches used in prior
       studies. These are:
          (1) syntactic manipulation, which is by far the most popular and is often used in
               form-orientated studies;
          (2) rhetorical manipulation, based on analyses of linguistic choices and the use of
               rhetorical language to exaggerate positive information and obscure negative
               outcomes;
          (3) attribution of organisational outcomes, use of impression management
               techniques to link positive results to managerial decisions and negative
               outcomes to outside factors;
          (4) thematic manipulation, simple illustrations and preferences given to positive/
               negative categories;
          (5) selectivity, pervasive selection of positive data and narratives;
          (6) emphasis in visual presentation, particular emphasis placed on a piece of data,
               repetition of narratives and use of adjectives to reinforce selected themes; and
  (7) performance comparisons, selection of specific comparisons, benchmarks and             Integrated
      trends that display organisational performance most favourably.                         reporting
Brennan et al. (2009) cover these seven approaches in detail, and we do not intend to
repeat them here. In a nutshell, however, organisations use symbolic disclosures that
construct a positive framing of the company to acquire/maintain organisational
legitimacy (Neu et al., 1998), with companies often using impression management                   423
techniques to enhance corporate reputation (Highhouse et al., 2009). In so doing,
companies use less regulated narrative disclosures to exaggerate positive information
while obscuring, even dismissing or underplaying, negative information (Brennan et al.,
2009). Drawing from four impression management approaches, namely, thematic
manipulation, selectivity, emphasis in visual presentation and performance
comparisons, Brennan et al. (2009) examine press releases disclosures of UK companies.
Brennan et al. (2009, p. 823) conclude that “in practice multiple impression management
methods are used simultaneously” to advance specific organisational objectives.
    Within the context of IR practice, Melloni, 2015, who examined intellectual capital
disclosures (ICD) practices of worldwide companies included in the IIRC pilot program,
found impression management techniques, thematic manipulation in particular, are
used to report ICD in the integrated reports. Melloni concludes that “firms use ICD
opportunistically to advance their corporate image” (Melloni, 2015, p. 675). Several other
empirical studies have documented that current IR practice is symbolic (Solomon and
Maroun, 2012; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Veltri and Silvestri, 2015; Setia et al., 2015),
with South African companies, in particular, adopting “a legitimation strategy based on
symbolic management when preparing integrated reports” (Setia et al., 2015, p. 397).
    In this study, we draw from impression management theory to explain the emerging
multiple capital disclosure practices in various organisational reports following the
adoption of mandatory IR requirement. Our intention is to uncover specific grammars
and emerging themes used in organisational reports on the interdependencies and
trade-offs between multiple capitals, or components of a capital. In so doing, we
undertake critical discourse analyses to examine the content of various organisational
reports. To make sense of the approaches used to report multiple capitals, we
specifically draw from five impression management approaches, namely, rhetorical
manipulation, thematic manipulation, selectivity, emphasis in visual presentation and
performance comparisons (Brennan et al., 2009). Our choice of impression management
theory, and these five impression management strategies in particular, is largely
influenced by the nature of IR, and multiple capital disclosures, given the combination of
both financial and non-financial aspects of organisational performance. In addition, we
find impression management theory particularly useful in explaining how companies
report and integrate the emerging multiple capitals framework for two reasons.
    First, unlike previous organisational reporting norms, existing IR guidelines
explicitly encourage companies to balance “positive” and “negative” information to
improve the quality of corporate reports (King III, 2009; IIRC, 2013a). For example, King
III (2009, p. 49) states that the “board should ensure that the positive and negative
impacts of the company’s operations and plans […] are conveyed in the integrated
report”. Similarly, the IIRC (2013a, p. 5) emphasises that “an integrated report should
include all material matters, both positive and negative, in a balanced way and without
material error”. In the context of multiple capitals, the IIRC framework urges companies
QRAM   to give “equal consideration to both increases and decreases in the capitals, both
13,4   strengths and weaknesses of the organisation, both positive and negative performance,
       etc” (IIRC, 2013a, p. 22). As a result, considering these local and international calls for
       “balanced” reporting, we examine how the adoption of IR practice has influenced
       organisational reporting practice, particularly within the context of highly regarded
       integrated reporters in a regulatory IR environment. Second, unlike traditional annual
424    reports where financial and non-financial information are presented in silos, the IR
       agenda promises to integrate both reporting strands. Therefore, given organisational
       tendency to use impression management techniques in less regulated narrative
       disclosures (Brennan et al., 2009), the nature of integrated reports, which in essence
       combine both highly and less regulated disclosures, presents unique setting to examine
       how companies use impression management techniques following the adoption of IR
       practice.


       4. Research methodology
       To reiterate, the objective of this study is to examine how the adoption of IR practice, and
       the embedded multiple capital framework, has influenced organisational reporting
       practice following the introduction of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in South
       Africa. Using qualitative case study approach based on discourse analyses, we
       specifically examine how the multiple capitals are reported and integrated in various
       organisational reporting channels following the adoption of IR practice. In doing so, we
       explore how highly regarded, award-winning, South African companies report the
       interdependencies and trade-offs between multiple capitals, or components of a capital
       within the context of organisational value creation/destruction process.


       4.1 Selection of research cases
       Our study is located within the South African reporting context, where IR is required on
       an “apply or explain” basis for all companies listed on Johannesburg Securities
       Exchange (JSE). Through King III Code of Corporate Governance (2009), the JSE
       requires all listed companies to produce an integrated report, or else explain reasons of
       not doing so, since 1 March 2010. The IR requirement, which builds on a chain of recent
       corporate governance reforms (King II, 2002), has its roots in South Africa’s quest to
       fight against corruption, social and economic inequalities that go back to the apartheid
       era (King III, 2009; de Villiers et al., 2014). For instance, King II highly advocated for
       sustainability reporting and embedded it in the corporate governance requirements.
       However, King III (2009), while continuing to support the notion of sustainability
       reporting, requires sustainability reporting to be integrated with financial reporting.
       The objective of IR is to “enable stakeholders to assess the ability of an organisation to
       create and sustain value over the short-, medium- and long-term” (Integrated Reporting
       Committee of South Africa; IRC, 2011, p. 1). King III (2009, p. 12) argues that IR has
       internal and external benefits:
          By issuing integrated reports, a company increases the trust and confidence of its stakeholders
          and the legitimacy of its operations. It can increase the company’s business opportunities and
          improve its risk management. By issuing an integrated report internally, a company evaluates
          its ethics, fundamental values, and governance, and externally improves the trust and
          confidence which stakeholders have in it.
In line with these developments, we explore the implications of IR practice on                       Integrated
organisational reporting practice following the introduction of IR requirement in South               reporting
Africa. In particular, using discourse analyses to obtain richer insights, we examine how
companies report the interdependencies and trade-offs between the capitals. Given the
nature of discourse analyses in terms of searching for “meaning” and “context” of the
issue at hand as well as going beyond from “what” is reported to “how” it is reported
(Beattie et al., 2004; Powell, 2007), we have limited our analyses to five companies.                     425
    Our selection of the sample companies was informed and guided by case study
research as well as the nature of discourse analyses. In particular, our choice of the
sample companies was influenced by three factors. First, all five companies have shown
illustrations, albeit at a general level, of the research questions of this study. For
example, we have conducted preliminary screening exercise on the integrated reports of
larger sample of South African companies to explore IR practice, and in particular, how
companies are embracing existing IR guidelines and multiple capital frameworks. The
selected cases for this study have shown explicit awareness on multiple capitals
framework based on IR guidelines as well as multiple capital frameworks in their latest
integrated reports (Sigma Project, 2003; King III, 2009; Forum for the Future, 2009). The
following extract from the integrated report of one of the selected cases shows
awareness on multiple capital frameworks:
   Our ability to create value depends on certain forms of capital, how we use them and our
   impact on them. We apply the capitals model, initially developed by Forum for the Future, in
   managing and assessing our ability to create value over time. Our report aims to explain how
   we use and affect the capitals. We recognise that the capitals are interrelated and fundamental
   to the long-term viability of our business. Intellectual capital is integrated into the human,
   financial and manufactured capitals as this better reflects the nature of our business as a
   financial services organisation (Standard Bank, Integrated Report, 2013, p. 2).
Hence, the cases were not selected at random, but rather, were selected after publicly
revealing the issues of concern in their integrated reports. This selection approach is
appropriate for case analyses research (Eisenhardt, 1989; Chenhall and Langfield-Smith,
1998; Powell, 2007) and is consistent with recent IR studies (Higgins et al., 2014).
   Second, the selected cases were consistently in the top five of Ernst & Young’s
Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards winners for the years 2013 and 2014 (Ernst
and Young, 2013, 2014). The yearly Ernst & Young’s Excellence in Integrated Reporting
Awards is awarded to the best integrated reporters in South Africa. These companies
are therefore highly regarded as “leaders” in the IR initiative and are likely to set the
agenda for the rest. Therefore, analyses of their IR practice would enhance our
understanding of how IR practice has influenced organisational reporting practice.
Finally, the selected firms belong to environmentally and non-environmentally sensitive
industries. The findings of this study would therefore reveal how IR is taking shape
across different sectors. Table I provides brief information on the selected cases.

4.2 Sources of data
Companies can provide integrated information through a number of organisational
reporting channels including, inter alia, annual reports, standalone sustainability
reports, websites and/or special reports. The IIRC (2013a, p. 8) explicitly states that “an
integrated report may be either a standalone report or be included as a distinguishable,
prominent and accessible part of another report or communication”. In practice, there is
QRAM                 evidence that companies endeavour to provide integrated information in various
13,4                 reporting channels such as corporate websites as shown below:
                        For more information on the inputs, outputs and outcomes of our business model and
                        integrated value chain, in relation to the six capitals model of value creation, which is the model
                        recommended by the IIRC’s Consultation Draft published in April 2013, refer to the video on
                        www.sasol.com (Sasol 2013, Integrated Report, p. 11).
426
                     As a result, we explore how companies report and integrate multiple capital disclosures
                     in various organisational reporting channels including annual integrated reports,
                     standalone sustainability reports, websites, and online reports including media releases,
                     press releases, newsletters and other reports. In so doing, we have undertaken a
                     longitudinal analysis of four years (2011-2014). The selection of this period is largely
                     influenced by two factors. First, IR developments have started in the tail-end of 2009 in
                     South Africa (King III, 2009). As of 2011, the expectation is that companies had gained
                     basic understanding of fundamental concepts of IR having already started their IR
                     journey in the preceding year. Our initial analyses, which involved screening early years
                     of integrated reports of a larger sample, showed that companies were growing into the
                     IR concept. As a result, examining the years 2011-2014 allows us to track specific
                     developments of IR practice, and in particular, multiple capitals disclosures. Second, the
                     selection was limited by data availability and nature of discourse analyses which is
                     effectively drawn from a small amount of data (Powell, 2007).
                         In total, we have examined 54 organisational reports over the four-year period,
                     encompassing integrated reports, standalone sustainability reports, website contents
                     and press/media releases. Table II summarises various sources of data and number of
                     reports from each company.

                     4.3 Techniques for analyses
                     We have conducted discourse analyses based on thematic content analysis to closely
                     engage with the content of organisational reports (Beattie et al., 2004; Powell, 2007;
                     Baker and Ellece, 2011). Given our interest to examine multiple capital disclosures
                     within their specific context and how companies align the reports to exiting IR
                     guidelines (Baker and Ellece, 2011), we explored specific grammars and languages used
                     to report and integrate the capitals. In so doing, we have examined the entirety of
                     organisational reports. The analyses were not limited to any particular section of the
                     reports, but focused on how companies report and integrate multiple capitals, or
                     components of a capital. In the case of websites, given their nature, the analyses were


                                                        Market capitalisation of selected casesa
                     Companies                      Year 2011 Year 2012 Year 2013 Year 2014 Industry

                        Royal Bafokeng Platinum Ltd 1,115,299 1,119,732          934,128 1,008,940 Mining
                        Sasol Ltd                      33,558,923 26,911,939 27,748,115 38,799,537 Oil and Gas
Table I.                Standard Bank Group Ltd        19,266,941 22,460,188 19,960,379 20,050,390 Financials
Market capitalisation Truworths International Ltd       4,941,169 5,029,608 3,989,258 2,978,867 Consumer Services
and industrial          Gold Fields Ltd                11,081,727 8,905,494 2,415,891 3,501,992 Mining
affiliation of research
cases                   Notes: a Data are obtained from OSIRIS Database; All currencies are in US$ (thousands)
                                  Integrated     Sustainability     Online
                                                                                                         Integrated
Companies                           reports         reports        materials*     Websites       Total    reporting
Royal Bafokeng Platinum Ltd            4                0               4             1            9
Sasol Ltd                              4                4               4             1           13
Standard Bank Group Ltd                4                4               4             1           13
Truworths International Ltd            4                2               0             1            7
Gold Fields Ltd                        4                4               3             1           12
                                                                                                                 427
Total                                 20               14              15             5           54
                                                                                                              Table II.
Note: * Online materials include media releases, press releases, newsletters and other reports           Sources of data


limited to recent disclosures. Our investigation involved searching for meaning in the
context of both explicit and implicit disclosures and integration of the capitals, in
particular, disclosures on interdependencies and trade-offs between multiple capitals, or
components of a capital. We have taken cognisance from the discourse analyses of
Powell (2007, p. 5) that:
   […] involved the examination and comparison of the nature, configuration and placement of
   information (narrative and non-narrative); consideration of the purpose, appearance and tone
   of language; identification of significant visual characteristics (i.e. size, colour, placement and
   frequency of non-narrative disclosures typesetting, layouts, use of borders and headings for
   narrative disclosures), and the emergence of dominant patterns, themes, or trends over the
   period of the investigation.
Given the nature of discourse analyses, we were reluctant to use a disclosure index
because our intention was not to quantify the extent of multiple capital disclosures, but
to identify specific themes and discourses on multiple capital disclosure practices
following the adoption of IR practice. However, we were informed by a checklist
developed based on normative understanding of existing IR guidelines as well as
multiple capital frameworks. In developing the checklist, existing local and
international IR guidelines were initially examined (King III, 2009; IRC, 2011, 2013a,
2013b). In the initial process, we have specifically examined how local and international
IR guidelines discuss the multiple capitals and, in particular, the interdependencies and
trade-offs between multiple capitals as well as components of a capital. We have also
reviewed previous multiple capital proposals (Sigma Project, 2003; Forum for the
Future, 2009). Based on normative understanding of existing IR guidelines, we were able
to come up with a number of potential reporting narratives pertaining integration of
multiple capitals. The research instrument is shown in Appendix.
    We have undertaken a two-stage discourse analyses. In the first stage, the analyses
were conducted by two experienced researchers, who were involved in prior discourse
analyses research work. In this stage, the analyses were limited to integrated reports,
with both researchers reading all the integrated reports, each at the same time. The
appearance of a particular narrative (as per the predefined checklist) in the reports was
discussed in its reported context, tone of language, purpose and theme. After
discussions, the two researchers would agree on how the issue of interest was reported,
incorporated and integrated in the reports. In the second stage, once the scoring method
became clear to both researchers, one of the researchers has extended the discourse
analyses to other organisational repots to ensure consistency across other
QRAM   organisational reports. Upon completion, the other researcher has conducted
13,4   independent analyses to ensure reliability and validity of the findings. In case there were
       discrepancies, or a need for further analyses, the two researchers would collectively and
       independently undertake specific additional analyses. The ensuing section presents the
       research findings.

428    5. Research findings
       Based on the research objectives, we discuss the research findings in three main
       subsections. The first section provides general account of IR practice, aimed to illustrate
       the nature of multiple capital disclosures in various organisational reporting outlets.
       Second, drawing from five impression management techniques, we illustrate how
       companies report and integrate multiple capitals, with a focus on the interdependencies
       and trade-offs between the capitals. In particular, we expose specific grammars and
       semiotic choices underpinning multiple capital disclosures. To frame the discussion,
       each major narrative is discussed within the context of existing multiple capital
       frameworks and IR guidelines. Finally, we discuss the implications of IR, and embedded
       multiple capitals frameworks, on organisational reporting practice over time. In so
       doing, we identify emerging themes in various organisational reporting channels.

       5.1 Nature of multiple capital disclosures
       To understand specific organisational reporting approaches used to report multiple
       capitals, we have examined how companies conceptualise and integrate multiple capitals
       in various organisational reports. The following subsections discuss these narratives in
       detail.
          5.1.1 Conceptualising the multiple capitals. The research cases have all showed some
       form of awareness about the six capitals in their reports, and particularly in the
       integrated reports. The definitions given and classifications of the capitals are largely in
       line with those of existing multiple capital frameworks and IR guidelines. For instance,
       discussions on multiple capitals have evolved from five capitals, as initially proposed by
       Sigma Project (2003) and Forum for the Future (2009), to the six capitals classification,
       adding intellectual capital, as advocated in the IIRC (2013a) framework. However,
       companies adopt the capitals frameworks at face value, without explicitly disclosing
       how the proposed capitals are operationally relevant to organisational activities. We
       observe that the companies are not critical about the six capitals framework and are
       going with the flow, perhaps to avoid unfavorable attention:
          As outlined on page 6, the Integrated Reporting Framework of the IIRC classifies the capitals
          upon which a business depends for its success as financial, manufactured, intellectual, human,
          social and relationship, and natural capital. These capitals are either increased, decreased or
          transformed through the activities of the business and should ultimately result in value
          creation (Truworths International (2014), Integrated Report, p. 15).
       While the company, as shown in the above extract, cites the IIRC capitals framework
       and shows an understanding that the capitals are “increased, decreased, or
       transformed” through organisational activities, the company fails to provide specific
       illustrations on “how” the multiple capitals have increased, decreased or transformed
       through the company’s activities. Our analyses in the other research cases show a
       similar pattern. Most companies were also silent on how the capitals have increased,
       decreased and transformed during the reporting period. In addition, discussions on the
multiple capitals are largely restricted to the integrated reports, with companies hardly            Integrated
making explicit references to the capitals in other organisational reporting channels.                reporting
Sasol and Standard Bank were exceptions, as they have started to extend discussions on
the capitals to their 2013 and 2014 sustainability reports. Royal Bafokeng Platinum has
also started to report the capitals in its website. However, the multiple capitals
framework is not viewed as an overall organisational reporting philosophy but is seen
as a specific metaphor in the integrated reports.                                                         429
    Another major observation is that companies, regardless of their industry, conform
to similar reporting language in reporting the capitals. For instance, we expected
companies in the extractive industries such as Sasol, Gold Fields and Royal Bafokeng
Platinum to discuss, in great lengths, how their operations have increased, decreased
and transformed natural and social capitals, whereas companies in the finance sector
such as Standard Bank would focus on intellectual and relational capitals. However,
while there are indications of the “industry effect” in certain disclosures, our
observations show no substantial or systematic difference across companies in terms of
how they conceptualise the multiple capitals collectively. This is due to the generic,
rather than company specific, nature of multiple capital discussions.
    During the analyses, however, we observed one particular scenario where one of the
cases (i.e. Truworths International) made attempts to align the capitals to organisational
operations. Truworths International reported that manufactured capital is not relevant
to their operations in the year 2013:
   Owing to the nature of our business, we do not at this stage believe that manufactured capital
   is relevant to our reporting (Truworths International, Integrated Report, 2013, p. 2).
Surprisingly, Truworths International reports manufactured capital in its integrated
report the following year (2014) without elaborating the inclusion of manufactured
capital, whether that was due to change in operations or evolving reporting practice:
   A new concept introduced by the framework relates to the six forms of capital which impact on
   value creation and diminution in a business. These comprise financial, manufactured,
   intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natural capital. The Group’s activities and
   performance relating to these capitals are covered throughout the Report. Refer to the Capitals
   of Value Creation on page 6 for further insight (Truworths International, Integrated Report,
   2014, p. 2).
We have undertaken further analyses in the company’s various reporting channels to
investigate the sudden inclusion of “manufactured capital” in the company’s integrated
report just a year after the company declared that “we do not at this stage believe that
manufactured capital is relevant to our reporting”. The objective of this specific analysis
was to find out whether the sudden inclusion of manufactured capital was due to
changes in organisational operations, in particular whether the company has had a
major acquisition and/or new product line in the year 2014. We have also searched for
specific explanation (e.g. feedback from stakeholders) to understand the inclusion of
manufactured capital from various organisational reports. However, we did not find any
evidence to suggest that the organisational operations have significantly changed to
justify inclusion of manufactured capital. There were also no specific explanations for
the inclusion of this capital. While this may suggest the gradual understanding of
companies in IR guidelines, and the multiple capitals in particular, it could also indicate
the symbolic nature of IR practice and disclosure of multiple capitals.
QRAM                     Finally, we have examined the implications of IR on the length of various reports,
13,4                 particularly integrated and sustainability reports. Our intention was to discover
                     whether the adoption of IR practice has reduced the number of pages of annual reports,
                     and how this has influenced sustainability reports. As shown in Table III, we found
                     mixed observations as, for instance, Sasol and Gold Fields have reduced the length of
                     their integrated reports over time, whereas Royal Bafokeng Platinum and Standard
430                  Bank have increased the number of integrated report pages. On the other hand, the
                     length of Truworths International’s integrated report remained flat over time. In terms
                     of sustainability reports (unreported), there is no evidence that the changes in the length
                     of integrated reports of individual companies have had a notable impact on the length of
                     sustainability reports. For instance, Standard Bank, in line with the increase in its
                     integrated report pages, has increased the length of sustainability reports over time. In
                     short, despite calls for concise reports in IR guidelines, we found no systematic evidence
                     to suggest that the adoption of IR practice has reduced the length of organisational
                     reports over time.
                         5.1.2 Integration of the capitals. During the analyses, we have specifically examined
                     “how” the multiple capitals or components of a capital are incorporated and integrated
                     in various organisational reporting platforms. The intention was to explore how the
                     adoption of IR, and the embedded multiple capitals framework, have shaped reporting
                     behaviour. In the analyses, we have looked into two dimensions. First, we explored a
                     general level of incorporation of the capitals in the integrated and other organisational
                     reports. Second, we examined how companies go beyond mere incorporation of the
                     capitals in organisational reports and establish links between them. In particular, we
                     analysed how the research cases report interdependencies and trade-offs between the
                     capitals, searching for specific grammars in IR guidelines such as “increases, decreases,
                     and transformations” of the capitals.
                         In terms of general level of incorporation, our analyses show that companies continue
                     to report the capitals in silos, and there are limited attempts to integrate them. The
                     integrated reports, and to a lesser extent sustainability reports, contain separate
                     sections for individual capitals. The following example indicates the structure of a
                     typical integrated report:
                        This decision has resulted in a saving of R750 million in the Group’s processing capital
                        expenditure as detailed below (see page 59 of the Manufactured capital section of this report for
                        more information on this strategy) and a 25 per cent improvement in our enterprise internal
                        rate of return (IRR) (Royal Bafokeng Platinum (2013), Integrated Report, p. 45).
                     The above illustration is the norm of current IR practice, with companies continuing to
                     discuss the capitals in separate sections rather than in an integrated manner. The


                                                      Integrated reports: number of pages over time
                     Companies                         2011         2012        2013          2014      Trend

                     Royal Bafokeng Platinum Ltd       174           208          200          262      Overall increase
Table III.           Sasol Ltd                         153           150          130          130      Overall decrease
Number of pages of   Standard Bank Group Ltd           158           182          192          200      Overall increase
integrated reports   Truworths International Ltd       146           144          140          144      Remained flat
across companies     Gold Fields Ltd                   172           172          166          125      Overall decrease
silo presentation of the capitals, notwithstanding, companies acknowledge the                            Integrated
interrelatedness and interdependencies between multiple capitals:                                         reporting
   Our report aims to explain how we use and affect the capitals. We recognise that the capitals are
   interrelated and fundamental to the long-term viability of our business. Intellectual capital is
   integrated into the human, financial and manufactured capitals as this better reflects the
   nature of our business as a financial services organisation (Standard Bank, Integrated Report,
   2013, p. 2, emphasis added).                                                                               431
In addition, companies are also aware that there are potential “trade-offs” between the
capitals, as shown in the following extraction:
   The resources and relationships that are critical to our ability to create value are all
   interdependent, which, at times, necessitate certain trade-offs between them. In managing these
   trade-offs, we aim to minimise our negative impacts on the capital inputs and maximise
   positive outcomes, in the interests of all our stakeholders (Sasol, Integrated Report, 2014, p. 10,
   emphasis added).
Despite acknowledging the interrelatedness and trade-offs between the capitals, meaningful
integration between the capitals is limited, with the disclosures being mostly descriptive in
nature. While mere incorporation of the multiple capitals can be regarded as a development
in its own right at this early stage of the IR journey, lack of actual “integration” among the
capitals would nonetheless perpetuate traditional organisational reporting norms. For
instance, companies hardly discuss how investment in human and natural capitals in
previous years has transformed financial capital, and whether the increase in financial
capital is a result of exploitation/preservation of natural resources and how such
exploitations/preservations of natural capital have contributed to financial and other
capitals. There are, however, few attempts where companies link reductions in electricity
consumption (i.e. preservation of natural capital) to savings in financial capital:
   During 2014, Cerro Corona achieved a reduction in diesel consumption intensity of 12 per cent
   (TJ/MT mined) against a target of 12 per cent and a reduction in electricity consumption
   intensity of 6 per cent (TJ/MT processed) against a target of 8 per cent, leading to savings of
   USA$4.3 million in energy costs (Gold Fields (2014), Integrated Report, p. 62).
These disclosures, albeit very limited, reflect an emerging practice which recognises the
interdependencies and trade-offs between multiple capitals following the adoption of IR
practice. It also shows how disclosures on wider organisational performance, when
viewed through the lens of multiple capitals, could lead to communication of
organisational value creation, beyond economic value, as further discussed below.
   5.1.3 Multiple capitals and value creation. In this section, we report how companies
communicate organisational value creation/destruction discourses through the lens of
multiple capitals and material issues. The “value to investors” emphasis, and the
ongoing institutionalisation of narrowly conceptualised “value creation”, in current IR
proposals has already been heavily criticised by a number of academic scholars (Milne
and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014). In our analyses, we find that the “value to
investors” rhetoric, and the business case approach, continues to significantly shape
how companies conceptualise organisational value creation post the adoption of IR
practice:
   We believe that ROE ratio is the most relevant measure of our performance over time as it
   combines all our critical value drivers, including earnings growth and regulatory capital
QRAM      measures, into a single metric that measures the success of our strategy and business
          performance (Standard Bank, 2014, Integrated Report, p. 15).
13,4
          The ultimate test of our strategy is to deliver sustainable and superior financial performance
          over the long term, measured by earnings and ROE (Standard Bank, 2014, Integrated Report,
          p. 8).
432    The above narratives, which are only a representation of widespread organisational
       reporting practice, raise questions on the ultimate aim of multiple capital
       disclosures, given companies continue to view traditional financial measures (e.g.
       ROE) as “the most relevant measure of our performance over time as it combines all
       our critical value drivers”. At the risk of stating the obvious, perhaps the answer to
       this question is that disclosures on capitals other financial capital, which are
       ceremonial in nature anyway, are only symbolic gestures aimed to manage
       perceptions of non-financial stakeholder groups.
          To be fair, companies attempt to link specific organisational decisions to wider value
       creation. In most cases, however, these decisions are economically, rather than socially/
       environmentally, motivated, as shown below:
          To align with the increasing trend towards online reporting and electronic access to
          information, we have elected no longer to print our Report and rather have made it
          available online. This has resulted in a meaningful cost saving and has also reduced our
          environmental impact. A preliminary report containing abridged financial statements has
          been mailed to all shareholders (Truworths International, Integrated Report, 2014, p. 3).

       5.2 Impression management approaches
       To explain the nature of multiple capital disclosures, we draw from five impression
       management techniques, namely, rhetorical manipulation, thematic manipulation,
       selectivity, emphasis in visual presentation and performance comparisons (Brennan
       et al., 2009). The following sections discuss the research findings in the context of
       these measures.
          5.2.1 Rhetorical manipulation. We closely examined the nature of multiple capital
       disclosures in the context of IR guidelines and multiple capital frameworks to
       identify the “form” and “substance” of the disclosures. We specifically analysed
       linguistic choices and the extent of rhetorical language in reporting multiple
       capitals. Our observations indicate that the contents of the reports are largely
       generic, dominated by symbolic narratives as opposed to substantive,
       company-specific disclosures. There is a preference to massage the capitals in a
       bypassing form, often in a descriptive approach. For instance, as mentioned earlier,
       there are limited attempts to discuss the capitals in the context of specific increases,
       decreases and transformations, as well as trade-offs between the capitals. In the rare
       cases when companies attempt to provide systematic multiple capital disclosures,
       the discussions are largely empty rhetoric peppered with some cursory terms in
       existing IR and multiple capital frameworks:
          As an integrated hydrocarbon monetiser, we make a substantial net-positive contribution to
          most of the capital inputs. However, we acknowledge that the key natural capital inputs to our
          business are non-renewable resources, which may impact negatively on human and social
          capital. For example, by competing for resources such as water. Our strategic decision not to
          pursue coal-to-liquids growth, but to focus, instead, on gas as a bridge to a low-carbon
   economy, demonstrates our commitment to reducing the negative impacts of our operations on         Integrated
   natural capital. We also invest significantly in reducing our own environmental footprint and
   in enhancing the environmental contribution of our products and processes (Sasol, Integrated
                                                                                                       reporting
   Report, 2014, p. 10, emphasis added).
In the above extract, use of rhetorical language notwithstanding, the framing of
disclosures that “the key natural capital inputs to our business are non-renewable
resources, which may impact negatively on human and social capital” suggests that the                      433
company is not precise about the effects of its operations on human and social capitals.
There is extensive use of some cursory IR terms, in the above case “natural, social and
human capitals” in an empty rhetoric, to justify adoption of IR practice. The following
extract follows a similar pattern:
   We create value through our business activities using the stocks of capital available to us.
   Understanding our dependence on, and contribution to these forms of capital is fundamental to
   our ability to continue creating value over the long term. Ultimately, the most significant
   outcomes of our business activities are in their contribution to socioeconomic development,
   which we can only achieve through remaining profitable and staying relevant to the societies
   we serve (Standard Bank, Integrated Report, 2013, p. 6, emphasis added).
The terms such as “stocks of capital” are used loosely to establish conformity with
existing multiple capital frameworks and IR guidelines. The research cases, which are
highly regarded award-wining integrated reporters, provide limited disclosures on
specific business activities that increase, decrease and transform the capitals. The
companies are also silent on positive and particularly negative trade-offs between
multiple capitals, or components of a capital. Interestingly, generic disclosures are
widespread across different organisational reporting channels. The following narrative
is stated in the website of Royal Bafokeng Platinum:
   We assess our carbon emissions every year and use the results of these assessments to help us
   improve our carbon intensity. Not only is it socially responsible to make every effort to reduce
   our carbon intensity but it also makes good business sense as reducing our carbon intensity
   will mean improving our efficiency in terms of the amount of fuel and electricity we use to
   produce a tonne of concentrate (Royal Bafokeng Platinum, Website, November 8, 2015).
The adoption of IR practice, particularly in the context of highly regarded companies in
a regulatory environment, has not really stimulated new organisational reporting
practice and is mere continuation of the traditional, symbolic, corporate reporting norm.
It is likely that this trend would continue unless proper accountability measures are in
place.
    5.2.2 Thematic manipulation. Thematic manipulation refers to organisational
tendency to use simple illustrations and categorisations to communicate
positive/negative information. Given the nature of multiple capital frameworks, we
examined how companies discuss positive and negative trade-offs between the capitals,
or components of a capital. In particular, we analysed specific grammars and themes
used to report the capitals.
    Our analyses, on the one hand, show that companies are increasingly conforming to
existing multiple capital frameworks and IR guidelines by using specific terms such as
“increases, decreases and transformations” of the capitals. However, use of these terms
is only metaphorical, commonly cited in few pages of the integrated and, to lesser extent,
QRAM   sustainability reports. To put this in perspective, observe how terms such as “increases,
13,4   decreases and transformation” are used in the following extract:
          The analysis of performance on the following pages aims to show how the Group’s financial
          capital has been increased, decreased or transformed through the operating and investing
          activities in the 2014 financial period, and how this is expected to contribute to longer-term
          value creation for our shareholders (Truworths International, Integrated Report, 2014, p. 48).
434
       Despite the narrow conceptualisation of linking financial capital to longer-term value
       creation “for our shareholders” rather than to wider organisational value creation, our
       analyses of the “performance on the following pages” showed limited discussion on
       “how the Group’s financial capital has been increased, decreased or transformed” or
       even “how this is expected to contribute to longer-term value creation for our
       shareholders”. In essence, specific terms in existing IR guidelines are used at a
       superficial level, without providing substantive, company-specific, disclosures on how
       certain capitals have been increased, decreased or transformed.
          There is also pervasive use of simple illustrations to discuss potential trade-offs
       between the capitals. Companies are remarkably silent on “how” increases, decreases
       and transformations of the capitals have had implications on organisational value
       creation/destruction. In addition to “increases, decreases and transformation”, there is
       also use of terms such as “inputs”, “outputs” and “outcomes” of the capitals in a limited
       and vague context:
          Our business model centres on monetising hydrocarbon resources in developed and emerging
          countries. Inputs from each of the six capitals are crucial for the conversion of hydrocarbon
          reserves into product streams. These primary outputs include the liquid fuels needed to move
          people and goods, the chemicals widely used in industrial and consumer products, and the
          low-carbon electricity that increasingly powers our facilities and contributes to national power
          generation capacity. The effective production and delivery of our goods and services generates
          value for all our stakeholders (Sasol, Integrated Report, 2014, p. 9).
       Despite cursory use of specific terms espoused in existing IR guidelines such as inputs,
       outputs as well as increases, decreases and transformations of multiple capitals, most
       disclosures lack substance. Taken together, we find that companies continue to use
       simple illustrations and categorisations of disclosures post the adoption of IR practice.
           5.2.3 Selectivity. It is a longstanding corporate reporting tradition to promote positive
       disclosures, especially less regulated narrative disclosures, and obscure negative outcomes
       (Brennan et al., 2009; Ahmed Haji, 2013; Williams and Adams, 2013). The IR initiative,
       however, encourages companies to disclose both positive and negative material information
       in the context of risks and opportunities and to communicate organisational value creation/
       destruction through the lens of multiple capitals (King III, 2009; IIRC, 2013a). In particular,
       the multiple capitals frameworks recognise interdependencies and potential trade-offs
       between the capitals: what is negative (decrease) in the context of a particular capital could
       have positive (increase/transformative) implications on other capitals.
           Our results, however, show that companies continue to exaggerate positive
       information while ignoring negative outcomes following the implementation of IR
       practice. While certain negative disclosures are driven by the nature of corporate
       operations (e.g. mining companies disclose employee fatalities), positive disclosures still
       dominate various organisational reports. In particular, companies exaggerate positive
“highlights” on financial, social and natural capitals while obscuring negative                       Integrated
“lowlights”.                                                                                           reporting
   In addition, companies are selective of the negative disclosures and hardly discuss
such disclosures within the context of multiple capitals, particularly in terms of how
certain negative incidents had decreased specific capitals or components of a capital:
   The transformation of Gold Fields into a mid-tier producer has clearly had a profound impact
   on the profile of our workforce. The most obvious, and painful, has been the need to reduce the         435
   number of employees to bring down the cost base to a more sustainable level. This process
   started in 2013, when just over 711 employees were made redundant, and continued in 2014
   with 1,309 retrenchments (8 per cent of our total workforce), mostly at our Ghanaian mines and
   at South Deep. With 8,954 employees and 6,486 contractors on our books at the end of 2014, we
   believe our human resource base is now close to where it should be in terms of numbers (Gold
   Fields, Integrated Report, 2014, p. 21).
In the above extract, Gold Fields justifies the decision to terminate employees as there
has been a need to “bring down the cost base to a more sustainable level”. In other words,
the decision, which had direct negative (diminution) impact on human capital, and
potentially on social and relational capital, was made to increase the company’s
financial capital. However, the framing of the disclosures is one of defending, even
promoting, organisational reputation, rather than recognising how certain
organisational decisions/actions decrease other capitals of intrinsic value. In addition,
while companies disclose other forms of negative incidents such as employee strikes,
turnover and fatalities, these negative incidents are downplayed, even ignored, with
companies trying to focus on a related positive trend:
   There were 29 significant transport-related incidents globally, similar to last year. The
   incidents this year resulted in seven fatalities, 20 injuries, five fires, 21 spillages and two
   extended road closures. Of these seven fatalities, five were drivers or occupants of other
   vehicles in road accidents and two were tanker drivers of third-party hauliers transporting
   [Company] products. Our transport incidents rate (measured as the number of significant
   incidents per 100 kilotons of product transported) improved to 0.092 from 0.094, our lowest
   ever recorded rate, in 2013 (Sasol, Integrated Report, 2014, p. 44).
While Sasol, in the above extract, discloses that there “were 29 significant
transport-related incidents globally, similar to last year”, the framing of the disclosures
is such that the negative incident is obscured, with the company, instead, promoting that
“our transport incidents rate improved to 0.092 from 0.094, our lowest ever recorded rate,
in 2013”. Sasol also ignores potential implications of this incident on its corporate
reputation, social and relational capital and employees. The following extract further
illustrates how companies continue to obscure negative information:
   The annual turnover of permanent employees during the financial period was 15 per cent
   (2012: 14 per cent). Turnover at the senior and top management levels is below 10 per cent and
   the average length of service at these levels is over 14 years, ensuring sustainable performance
   and business continuity (Truworths International, Integrated Report, 2013, p. 99).
In the above extract, the turnover level actually increased from 14 to 15 per cent, but the
disclosure is framed to focus on the:
   Turnover at the senior and top management levels is below 10 per cent and the average length
   of service at these levels is over 14 years, ensuring sustainable performance and business
   continuity
QRAM   without elaborating factors behind the increasing trend in employee turnover. In the
13,4   following year’s integrated report, Truworths International continues to obscure
       negative disclosures:
          Truworths International is committed to investing in human capital to ensure sustainable
          performance and continued industry leadership. The Group employs over 10 500 permanent
          and flexi-time employees, and the annual turnover of permanent employees was 16 per cent
436       compared to 15 per cent in 2013. During the period R87 million (2013: R83 million) was invested
          in training over 9,800 employees, with black staff accounting for 94 per cent of all trainees
          (Truworths International, Integrated Report, 2014, p. 42).
       Following the previous reporting pattern, Truworths International underplays the
       increase in employee turnover from 15 to 16 per cent, which in fact has been increasing
       from previous years, and exaggerates investments in training, in particular, “with black
       staff accounting for 94 per cent of all trainees”. The latter emphasis, which is in line with
       the South African government’s imperative actions to reduce income inequality gap and
       enhance the lives of historically disadvantaged citizens (e.g. Broad Based Black
       Economic Empowerment (BBBEE), is an attempt to showcase the organisation’s
       congruency with governmental initiatives.
          5.2.4 Emphasis in visual presentation. Companies use three different approaches to
       emphasise narrative disclosures in organisational reports including visual emphasis,
       repetition and use of adjectives to reinforce selected themes (Brennan et al., 2009). In
       particular, Brennan et al. (2009, p. 797) submit that “visuals such as graphic
       highlighting, headings, bulleted or numbered lists, colour, shading, logos, may
       foreshadow verbal discussion or reinforce key points”. Building on these measures, we
       have examined “whether” and “how” companies use these impression management
       techniques following the adoption of IR practice. Our analyses show that companies use
       all three approaches in various organisational reports to report the capitals. For
       instance, in direct conformity with the IIRC (2013a) framework’s input-process-output
       model of value creation, companies provide figures, tables and value creation charts to
       align the multiple capitals to organisational stakeholders, operations and business
       model.
          However, the content of these “value creation” figures and tables is generic, with no
       or limited further elaboration. It is difficult to make sense of the contents of the value
       creation figures as companies incorporate random, unverified, values and narratives.
       We have also observed that there is use of charts and tables to establish links between
       multiple capitals, material issues and various stakeholder groups.
          In addition, the research cases use repetition and reinforcement techniques to
       exaggerate positive performance while ignoring negative outcomes, with companies
       reproducing positive outcomes in various organisational reports. In terms of
       reinforcement techniques, some of the most commonly used techniques include bulleted
       and numbered lists which emphasise “achievements” in key financial and non-financial
       performance indicators. The following extract illustrates this trend where Sasol uses
       bullets to reinforce key points:
          Ninth year of 10-year collaboration with 11 South African universities, in which we are
          investing R250 million.

          Coached and mentored 393 workplace and leadership coaches.
   Partnered with the Mozambican Ministry of Mineral Resources, and made 30 bursaries                Integrated
   available for Mozambicans to undertake studies in engineering, science and geology.
                                                                                                      reporting
   Over the past four years, non-binding grants to the value of R16 million have been awarded to
   increase the pipeline of African, Indian and Coloured students at postgraduate level (Sasol,
   Integrated Report, 2014, p. 13).
In summary, use of various forms of visual presentation techniques to emphasise                           437
positive outcomes while obscuring, even dismissing, disappointment is pervasive in
various organisational reporting channels following the adoption of IR practice. The
ensuing section reports how companies are particularly selective of favourable
comparisons and trends.
   5.2.5 Performance comparisons. Building on prior evidence which has largely
suggested that companies select comparisons, benchmarks and trends that display
organisational performance most favourably (Brennan et al., 2009), we examined the
framing of multiple capital disclosure benchmarks and trends. Given the existing IR
guidelines explicitly inform companies to balance positive and negative information
(King III, 2009; IIRC, 2013a), we specifically explored how comparisons and trends of
multiple capital disclosures are framed following the adoption of IR practice. Based on
our analyses in various organisational reports, selection of positive trends dominates in
most disclosures:
   Scored 80 per cent (2013: 71 per cent) in the Carbon Disclosure Project and we were one of only
   nine companies in South Africa that were included on their Climate Performance Leadership
   Index A-list (Standard Bank, 2014, Integrated Report, p. 20).
There is also extensive use of tables to show trends of specific organisational
performance which have effects on one or more capitals. In most cases, the tables, which
are carefully incorporated in organisational reporting outlets, report improving trends.
In the rare cases when comparisons and trends reveal disappointing outcomes, the
framing of the disclosures is such that the negative outcome is obscured, discussed in a
bypassing form, or captured in a table/graph with no further elaboration on how the
organisation plans or intends to address the negative trend:
   Many energy efficiency initiatives undertaken in 2013 have been implemented in the Rosebank
   building. While the dual operation of offices has obscured the energy savings achieved for
   2013, we have managed to decrease our purchased electricity consumption by around 4 per
   cent compared to 2012 (Standard Bank, Sustainability Report, 2013, p. 93).
To reiterate, use of impression management techniques is pervasive in various
organisational reporting channels following the adoption of IR practice, with companies
continuing to exaggerate positive outcomes while ignoring how organisational
activities affect multiple capitals, particularly capitals of intrinsic value.

5.3 Disclosure and integration of multiple capitals over time
Our longitudinal analyses of organisational reports show three emerging themes in
IR practice, and in particular multiple capital disclosures, over the four-year
research period. First, one significant emerging theme is that the adoption of IR
practice has shaped the language of organisational reports. Companies are
increasingly aligning multiple capital disclosures, which are largely captured in the
integrated reports, to existing multiple capital frameworks and IR guidelines. In
QRAM   particular, there is a growing use of terms such as “increases, decreases,
13,4   transformations, inputs, outputs, and outcomes” in the context of multiple capital
       disclosures. Companies are also increasingly acknowledging potential “trade-offs”
       between multiple capitals. In addition, discussions on multiple capitals were less
       explicit in the years 2011 and 2012. However, separate sections of the integrated and,
       to a lesser extent sustainability reports, are devoted for the capitals, with explicit
438    headings of individual capitals, in the years 2013 and 2014. Despite the increasing
       alignment between multiple capital disclosures and existing IR guidelines, our
       analyses suggest that the disclosures are not integrated, with companies discussing
       capitals such as financial capital in the traditional context of operating profit, return
       on assets and financial position of the company. For instance, there are limited
       disclosures on how financial capital has been transformed to increase (decrease)
       other capitals. Discussions on other capitals follow a similar pattern. In a nutshell,
       while the adoption of IR practice has influenced the reporting language of integrated
       reporters, the quality of the reports has not really improved as companies continue
       to provide symbolic disclosures without meaningful discussion on the
       interdependencies and trade-offs between multiple capitals.
          Second, we observe a growing tendency to assign values to multiple capitals,
       regardless of their economic/intrinsic nature. While the assigned values are
       metaphorical, and are not necessarily the output of actual valuation process, the
       practice of assigning values to the capitals is aimed to showcase conformity with
       existing IR guidelines. Capturing certain capitals in dollar values to indicate their
       “economic value”, rather than “intrinsic value”, is contested, as it relegates capitals
       of intrinsic significance to economic value, perpetuating current economic
       hegemony in the business environment (Barter, 2015; Coulson et al., 2015).
          Third and final theme is that companies continue to use multiple impression
       management techniques following the adoption of IR practice. In particular, the current
       discourse on multiple capital disclosures is one of defending, even promoting,
       organisational reputation, rather than recognising how organisational actions, or
       inactions, impact multiple capitals, particularly capitals of intrinsic value. Instead,
       companies exaggerate positive outcomes while obscuring, even dismissing, negative
       trade-offs between the capitals.
          Given the regulatory oversight and the study’s focus on highly regarded,
       award-winning integrated reporters, we conclude that the adoption of IR practice, and
       the embedded multiple capital frameworks, has not really enhanced the quality of
       organisational reports. Hence, the findings of this study echo recent empirical
       observations in South Africa, and elsewhere, that IR practice is ceremonial, rather than
       substantive (Solomon and Maroun, 2012; Wild and van Staden, 2013; Melloni, 2015;
       Setia et al., 2015; Ahmed Haji and Anifowose, 2016). The findings of this study are also
       consistent with prior studies which have concluded organisational reporting practice is
       motivated by considerations other than organisational accountability (Brennan et al.,
       2009; Ahmed Haji and Mohd Ghazali, 2012; Williams and Adams, 2013).

       6. Discussion and conclusion
       The purpose of this study is to examine how the adoption of IR practice, and the
       embedded multiple capitals frameworks, has influenced organisational reporting
       practice following the introduction of an “apply or explain” IR requirement in South
Africa. In particular, we explore how companies report and integrate multiple            Integrated
capitals through the lens of organisational value creation/destruction discourses.        reporting
We draw from five impression management strategies to explain specific grammars
used to report the interdependencies and trade-offs between multiple capital
disclosures in various organisational reports of highly regarded, award-winning
integrated reporters in South Africa. Mindful of the division within academia
regarding the substance and ideals of IR proposals (Brown and Dillard, 2014;                  439
Flower, 2015; Adams, 2015; Coulson et al., 2015), our central aim is to provide early
empirical insights on IR practice and, in particular, whether current practice meets
the aspirations IR commentators have for it (Gleeson-White, 2014; Adams, 2015), or
whether it perpetuates prior norms of organisational reporting rhetoric (Milne and
Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014).
    Our findings first suggest that companies are increasingly conforming to
reporting language espoused in existing multiple capital frameworks and IR
guidelines over time. In particular, companies recognise that the multiple capitals
are increased, decreased and/or transformed through organisational activities, and
that there are potential trade-offs between multiple capitals, or components of a
capital. However, despite some cursory use of specific IR terms in existing IR
guidelines, the content of the reported information is generic, often vague, and lacks
contextual meaning. Second, we observe that the discussions on multiple capitals
are largely limited to integrated reports, with companies hardly making references
to the interdependencies and trade-offs between the capitals in other organisational
reporting channels, seemingly suggesting that the adoption of IR, and the embedded
capitals framework, even in the context of highly regarded integrated reporters in a
regulatory environment, is not internalised as an overall organisational reporting
philosophy. Finally, we find that companies continue to use multiple impression
management techniques such as use of rhetorical language to exaggerate positive
outcomes while underplaying, even dismissing, negative comparisons and trends.
In short, while there is evidence that the adoption of IR practice has influenced the
reporting language of companies, we find, upon closer inspection, that the current IR
practice lacks substance and falls short to reflect the aspirations IR commentators
have for it.
    The results of this study have a number of implications for regulatory
authorities, public and private sector organisations as well as academic researchers.
First, the results inform local and international regulatory authorities about how IR
practice is taking shape over time, particularly within the context of highly regarded
integrated reporters in a regulatory environment. Our observations show evidence
that, despite the regulatory oversight in South Africa – and the embedded assurance
provisions in King III – companies continue to provide symbolic disclosures, with
little or no substantive information on how organisational activities create/destroy
shared value. We therefore call for specific accountability measures to be developed
in a more stringent mandatory setting, rather than the existing “apply or explain”
requirements. In particular, we advocate for substantive assurance mechanisms
beyond current assurance provisions in non-financial reporting. The existing
assurance provisions have fundamental flaws, not because assurance providers
report to, and are hired by, company management, but because assurances in
non-financial disclosures are remarkably limited. Albeit organisational reporting
QRAM   and accountability measures should not entirely hinge on assurances and
13,4   regulatory oversight, we advocate for a uniquely intrusive inspection and
       verification disclosure process beyond the current narrowly framed governance,
       reporting and assurance provisions. Otherwise, we are unlikely to see substantial
       improvements in organisational reporting practice. Unless specific accountability
       measures are implemented both at the regulatory as well as organisational levels,
440    the sceptics of IR agenda would emerge right to question the actual worth of IR
       practice (Milne and Gray, 2013; Brown and Dillard, 2014; Flower, 2015).
          Second, our study which specifically focused on highly regarded, award-wining,
       integrated reporters, draws the attention of regulatory bodies as well as users of
       corporate reports to a growing number of rating agencies of corporate governance
       and reporting practices. The rating agencies, which draw significant conclusions
       about the quality of organisational reports without in-depth analyses and
       contextualised evidence, do not just encourage symbolic reporting, but given their
       ratings are relied upon by various corporate information users for reliability and
       credibility purposes, are likely to mislead users of corporate reports. The increasing
       number of such rating agencies should be subjected to scrutiny by relevant
       regulatory authorities to ensure the quality of their ratings and enhance the
       decision-making of corporate information users. Finally, in terms of theoretical
       implications, given the pervasive use of multiple impression management
       techniques in various organisational reports, this study supports the notion that
       corporate disclosure practices should be examined through the lens of multiple
       theoretical perspectives to enhance our understanding of the nature of
       organisational reporting practice (Brennan et al., 2009; Williams and Adams, 2013).
          The preceding implications notwithstanding, we acknowledge a number of
       limitations. First, despite our attempts to provide an in-depth qualitative analysis of
       “how” IR, and the embedded multiple capital frameworks, has influenced
       organisational reporting practice, this study does not explore “why” aspects of
       current IR practice. More in-depth work is required to explore the implications of IR
       practice on organisational reporting and thinking, particularly studies
       complementing how and why research questions. Second, given the newness of the
       IR agenda, our findings are only applicable to IR practice at its developmental stage.
       There is therefore an opportunity for further research to substantiate the
       observations of this study through longitudinal analyses of organisational reports.
       Finally, given our research question and the nature of discourse analyses, we have
       only examined five cases that have shown illustrations of the research question. In
       addition, the evidence is drawn from a regulatory IR environment. Further research,
       involving larger samples from diverse geo-political settings, is needed to enhance
       our understanding of the implications of IR on organisational reporting practice.

       References
       Abeysekera, I. (2013), “A template for integrated reporting”, Journal of Intellectual Capital, Vol. 14
            No. 2, pp. 227-245.
       Adams, C. (2015), “The international integrated reporting council: a call to action”, Critical
            Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 27, pp. 23-28.
       Ahmed Haji, A. (2013), “Corporate social responsibility disclosures over time: evidence from
            Malaysia”, Managerial Auditing Journal, Vol. 28 No. 7, pp. 647-676.
Ahmed Haji, A. and Anifowose, M. (2016), “The trend of integrated reporting practice in South           Integrated
       Africa: ceremonial or substantive?”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy
       Journal, Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 190-224.
                                                                                                         reporting
Ahmed Haji, A. and Mohd Ghazali, N.A. (2012), “The influence of the financial crisis on corporate
       voluntary disclosure: some Malaysian evidence”, International Journal of Disclosure and
       Governance, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 101-125.
Baker, P. and Ellece, S. (2011), Key Terms in Discourse Analysis, Continuum, New York, NY.                   441
Barter, N. (2015), “Natural capital: dollars and cents/dollars and sense”, Sustainability Accounting,
       Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 366-373.
Beattie, V., McInnes, B. and Fearnley, S. (2004), “A methodology for analysing and evaluating
       narratives in annual reports: a comprehensive descriptive profile and metrics for disclosure
       quality attributes”, Accounting Forum, Vol. 28 No. 3, pp. 205-236.
Brennan, N.M., Guillamon-Saorin, E. and Aileen Pierce, A. (2009), “Impression management:
       developing and illustrating a scheme of analysis for narrative disclosures – A
       methodological note”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 22 No. 5,
       pp. 789-832.
Brown, J. and Dillard, J. (2014), “Integrated reporting: on the need for broadening out and opening
       up”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7, pp. 1120-1156.
Chenhall, R. and Langfield-Smith, K. (1998), “Factors influencing the role of management
       accounting in the development of performance measures within organizational change
       programs”, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 9 No. 4, pp. 361-386.
Coulson, A.B., Adams, C., Nugent, M. and Haynes, K. (2015), “Exploring metaphors of capitals and
       the framing of multiple capitals: challenges and opportunities for IR”, Sustainability
       Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 290-314.
de Villiers, C., Rinaldi, L. and Unerman, J. (2014), “Integrated reporting: insights, gaps and an
       agenda for future research”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7,
       pp. 1042-1067.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989), “Building theories from case study research”, Academy of Management
       Review, Vol. 14 No. 4, pp. 532-549.
Ernst and Young (2013), EY’s Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2013: A Survey of
       Integrated Reports From South Africa’s Top 100 JSE Listed Companies and Top 10 State
       Owned Companies, Ernst & Young Global, London.
Ernst and Young (2014), EY’s Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2014: A Survey of
       Integrated Reports From South Africa’s Top 100 JSE-Listed Companies and Top 10
       State-Owned Companies, Ernst & Young Global, London.
Flower, J. (2015), “The international integrated reporting council: a story of failure”, Critical
       Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 27, pp. 1-17.
Forum for the Future (2009), “The five capitals model – a framework for sustainability”, available
       at: www.forumforthefuture.org/project/five-capitals/overview (Accessed 9 January 2016).
Gleeson-White, J. (2014), Six Capitals: The Revolution Capitalism Has to Have – Or Can
       Accountants Save the Planet?, Allen & Unwin, Sydney.
Gold Fields (2014), “Integrated Annual Report”, available at: www.goldfields.com/inv_rep_ar.php
Haller, A. and van Staden, C. (2014), “The value added statement – an appropriate instrument for
       integrated reporting”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7,
       pp. 1190-1216.
QRAM   Higgins, C., Stubbs, W. and Love, T. (2014), “Walking the talk(s): organisational narratives of
              integrated reporting”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7,
13,4          pp. 1090-1119.
       Highhouse, S., Brooks, M.E. and Gregarus, G. (2009), “An organizational impression management
              perspective on the formation of corporate reputations”, Journal of Management, Vol. 35
              No. 6, pp. 1481-1493.
442    Integrated Reporting Committee (IRC) of South Africa (2011), “Framework for integrated
              reporting and the integrated report”, Discussion Paper, Johannesburg.
       International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) (2013a), The International Integrated Reporting
              Framework, International Integrated Reporting Committee (IIRC), London.
       International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) (2013b), Basis for Conclusions, International
              Integrated Reporting Committee (IIRC), London.
       International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) (2016), When? Advocate for Global Adoption,
              available at: http://integratedreporting.org/when-advocate-for-global-adoption/ (accessed
              29 April 2016).
       King II (2002), “King Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa”, The King Committee on
              Corporate Governance and Institute of Directors in Southern Africa, South Africa.
       King III (2009), “King report on governance for South Africa”, King Code of Governance Principles
              Series.
       King IV (2016), “Draft King IV Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa”, King Code of
              Governance Principles Series, Institute of Directors in Southern Africa, South Africa.
       McElroy, M.W. and Thomas, M.P. (2015), “The multicapital scorecard”, Sustainability Accounting,
              Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 425-438.
       Melloni, G. (2015), “Intellectual capital disclosure in integrated reporting: an impression
              management analysis”, Journal of Intellectual Capital, Vol. 16 No. 3, pp. 661-680.
       Milne, M.J. and Gray, R. (2013), “W(h)ither ecology? The triple bottom line, the global reporting
              initiative, and corporate sustainability reporting”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 118,
              pp. 13-29.
       Neu, D., Warsame, H.A. and Pedwell, K.A. (1998), “Managing public impressions: environmental
              disclosures in annual reports”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 23 No. 3,
              pp. 265-282.
       Powell, L. (2007), “Green meaning: a discourse analysis of corporate communication”, Proceedings
              of the 5th Asia Pacific Interdisciplinary Research in Accounting Conference, Auckland.
       PwC (2013), “The value creation journey: a survey of JSE Top-40 companies’ integrated reports”,
              available at: www.pwc.co.za/en/assets/pdf/integrated-reporting-august-2013.pdf (accessed
              2 April 2015).
       Robertson, F.A. and Samy, M. (2015), “Factors affecting the diffusion of integrated reporting – A
              UK FTSE 100 perspective”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal,
              Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 190-223.
       Royal Bafokeng Platinum (2013), “Integrated Annual Report”, available at: www.
              bafokengplatinum.co.za/stake-annual-reports.php
       Sasol (2013), “Annual Integrated Report”, available at: www.sasol.com/investor-centre/financial-
              reporting/annual-integrated-report/latest
       Schlenker, B.R. (1980), Impression Management: The Self-Concept, Social Identity, and
              Interpersonal Relations, Brooks-Cole, Belmont, CA.
Setia, N., Abhayawansa, S., Joshi, M. and Huynh, A.V. (2015), “Integrated reporting in South           Integrated
       Africa: some initial evidence”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal,
       Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 397-424.                                                                       reporting
Sigma Project (2003), “The SIGMA guidelines: putting sustainable development into practice – a
       guide for organisations”, available at: www.projectsigma.co.uk/Guidelines/default.asp
       (accessed 9 January 2016).
Solomon, J. and Maroun, W. (2012), Integrated Reporting: The Influence of King III on Social,               443
       Ethical and Environmental Reporting, The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants,
       London.
Standard Bank (2014), “Annual Integrated Report”, available at: http://reporting.standardbank.
       com/resultsreports.php
Steyn, M. (2014), “Organisational benefits and implementation challenges of mandatory
       integrated reporting”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 5
       No. 4, pp. 476-503.
Stubbs, W. and Higgins, C. (2014), “Integrated reporting and internal mechanisms of change”,
       Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 27 No. 7, pp. 1068-1089.
Stubbs, W., Higgins, C., Milne, M. and Hems, L. (2014), “Financial capital providers’ perceptions of
       integrated reporting”, Working Paper, Electronic copy, available at: http://ssrn.com/
       abstract⫽2473426
Truworths International (2014), “Integrated Report”, available at: www.truworths.co.za/annual-
       report
Veltri, S. and Silvestri, A. (2015), “The free state university integrated reporting: a critical
       consideration”, Journal of Intellectual Capital, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 443-462.
Wild, S. and van Staden, C. (2013), “Integrated reporting: an initial analysis of early reporters”,
       paper presented at the Massey University Accounting Research Seminar, Auckland.
Williams, S.J. and Adams, C.A. (2013), “Moral accounting? Employee disclosures from a
       stakeholder accountability perspective”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal,
       Vol. 26 No. 3, pp. 449-495.
QRAM                  Appendix
13,4
                      No.              Checklist

                      The stock and flow of capitals
444                    1               Increases and decreases of capitals
                       2               Transformation of the capitals
                       3               Activities that increase, decrease and/or transform the capitals
                       4               Inputs, outputs, activities and outcomes of the capitals
                       5               Status of overall capitals
                      Categories and descriptions of the capitals
                       6              Financial capital
                       7              Manufactured capital
                       8              Intellectual capital
                       9              Human capital
                      10              Social and relationship capital
                      11              Natural capital
                      12              The interrelatedness and interdependencies between the capitals
                      13              Positive trade-offs between the capitals, or components of a capital
                      14              Negative trade-offs between the capitals, or components of a capital
                      15              The value creation/destruction process and the capitals
                      16              A holistic picture of the combination, interrelatedness and dependencies between the
                                      factors that affect a firm’s ability to create value over time
                      Material issues
                      17              The materiality determination process
                      18              Involvement and role of stakeholders in the identification of material issues
Table AI.             19              Classification of material issues into positive and negative matters
Research instrument   20              Discussion of material issues in the context of the capitals


                      Corresponding author
                      Abdifatah Ahmed Haji can be contacted at: fitka7@hotmail.com




                      For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
                      www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
                      Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
