                     The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
                     www.emeraldinsight.com/2049-372X.htm



                                                                                                                                Content
A mixed content analysis model of                                                                                               analysis
ethics in the accounting profession
                                       Mohammad Namazi
                               Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran, and
                                       Hossein Rajabdorri
         Islamic Azad University, Bandar Abbas Branch, Bandar Abbas, Iran                                               Received 19 July 2018
                                                                                                                       Revised 9 January 2019
                                                                                                                                 26 April 2019
                                                                                                                                  29 June 2019
                                                                                                                                  22 July 2019
Abstract                                                                                                                Accepted 29 July 2019
Purpose – The purpose of this study is to propose a contemporary-speciﬁc model entitled “sustainable
development model of accounting professional ethics (SDM-APE)” and empirically investigate and
quantitatively prioritize its components.
Design/methodology/approach – The study adopts the mixed content analysis research method and
integrates both qualitative and quantitative approaches. The necessary data for the initial model are extracted
after examining 569 published articles related to professional ethics of accounting in Iran during 2005-2015.
Then, the ethical codes are reviewed, summarized and extracted via “content analysis.” Based on the ﬁndings
of this study, a sustainable accounting model is developed, which consists of four constructs, including
personal, social, economic-organizational and environmental factors, with 69 components. Afterward, the
model is tested through collecting questionnaires and simple random sampling by 217 academic and
professional experts. Accordingly, the second-order conﬁrmatory factor analysis in LISREL software is used.
Findings – The paper clearly demonstrates that ethics in the professional accounting are underpinned by
four major constructs: personal, social, economic-organizational and environmental factors; all four mentioned
constructs of the model are interconnected and affect professional ethics in accounting and maintain a proper
goodness of ﬁt. Meanwhile, social, personal, economic-organizational and environmental features reveal the
greatest ﬁt accordingly. The variable of “avoiding the misuse of organizational property and information” is
the most important variable of the model. It is followed by deontology, responsibility and accountability for
environment, preventing environment degradation and emission of environmental pollutants, promoting the
culture of environmental conservation, standing in the second to ﬁfth priority levels, respectively.
Originality/value – This paper has developed a contemporary practical model in professional accounting
ethics, which is extensive and applicable to various organizations.
Keywords Accounting, Professional ethics, Sustainable development, Factor analysis,
Mixed content analysis
Paper type Research paper


1. Introduction
Accounting ethics is the guideline for an accountant’s decision. A professional accountant is
not exclusively responsible to satisfy the needs of clients or the employing organization, and
they should follow the ethical codes (IESBA, 2018). When important issues such as ethics
and accounting are dovetailed, more attention and consideration are necessary. In these
situations, ignoring some ethical criteria creates ﬁnancial corruption and is of great concern
in governmental and nongovernmental sectors. Indeed, consideration of ethics is the main
solution for such a crisis as the nature of affairs conducted by accountants and auditors

The authors are sincerely grateful to the anonymous prestigious editor, who is also a Professor and                Meditari Accountancy Research
two anonymous referees for their valuable comments which greatly enhanced the quality of the                          © Emerald Publishing Limited
                                                                                                                                       2049-372X
article.                                                                                                          DOI 10.1108/MEDAR-07-2018-0365
MEDAR   requires a high level of ethics (Mitschow and Asgary, 2004). Shareholders and other users of
        ﬁnancial statements also rely on the ﬁnancial statements of companies because they can
        make superior decisions about their investments through this information. They also rely on
        auditors who have conﬁrmed the ﬁnancial statements. In all of these situations, ethics play a
        signiﬁcant role because they create a public trust on the information provided by the
        accountants and auditors and prevents them from misdeeds to a great extent.
            Unfortunately, comprehensive and seminal empirical and practical studies on accounting
        professional ethics are scarce. This scarcity also involves ethical charters as well as codes of
        professional ethics and models. A study of the ethical codes prescribed by international
        institutions suggests that these codes are not comprehensive and generally encompass
        organizational issues. For instance, the Code of Ethics of the Institute of Management
        Accountants (IMA) emphasizes competence, conﬁdentiality, integrity and reality
        (Verschoor, 2005). The IFAC (International Federation of Accountants) (2014) also provides
        the enforceable codes of ethics, including the generalities and principles, integrity,
        objectivity, professional competence and care, conﬁdentiality and professional behavior and
        customs (Catherine, 2010). Although formulation of these codes is considered as a positive
        step toward improving the accounting professional ethics, their effect has been negligible
        because the constructs identiﬁed in codes of ethics are neither comprehensive nor based on
        systematic research and are prescriptive, and they rely more on deductive reasoning.
        Furthermore, the prescribed components of the codes are scattered and separated from each
        other and are unsystematic. Therefore, there is an ambiguous relationship between various
        components of the code of ethics. The importance of each prescribed ethical element is also
        equivocal in comparison with other codes of ethics. Hence, the inﬂuence of each factor
        cannot be recognized, and thus, the beneﬁt of each code of ethics is nuanced. Consideration
        of this issue necessitates identifying other dimensions and factors affecting professional
        ethics of accounting and developing a model.
            This study eliminates the preceding problems by providing a comprehensive and
        quantitative model of accounting professional ethics, which can overcome the
        aforementioned deﬁciencies by creating a practical model which is applicable in various
        organizations. The assumption of this study, based on the current literature (Payne et al.,
        2018; Blay et al., 2018), is that ethical behavior of the professional accountants cannot be
        improved merely by promulgating accounting codes of ethics; rather, it will be enhanced
        when the effects of various complex personal, organizational and social factors affecting the
        behavior of accountants are considered simultaneously. Actually, a professional accountant
        must comply with ethical considerations over and above the needs of their speciﬁc clients/
        organizations.
            In effect, based on the literature that will be presented in a later section, we speculate that
        professional ethical conduct of the accountants is comprised of the comprehensive functions
        of the personal, social, economic and organizational and sustainable development factors.
        To determine the exact effect, the elements of each factor must be unambiguously speciﬁed,
        and their relationship should be examined quantitatively.
            The importance of this study is that it uses “mixed content analysis approach” (Creswell
        and Plano Clark, 2011; Creamer and Ghoston, 2013) to provide a qualitative and quantitative
        and practical model applicable in different organizations. This model is comprehensive,
        whose constructs are based on empirical variables, not inductive (qualitative) and deductive
        (quantitative) reasoning. The importance of constructs is scientiﬁcally and systematically
        determined via the “second-order conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) technique” (Agostini
        et al., 2016; Mustapha and Bojuwon, 2015), and the systematic relationship of the model is
then speciﬁed. Accordingly, this study can signiﬁcantly expand the knowledge boundaries,          Content
especially in the ﬁeld of mixed model of professional accounting ethics.                          analysis
    The structure of this study is as follows. Theoretical development and literature review
will be presented in Section 2 which also introduces a novel contemporary model entitled as
“(SDM-APE).” Section 3 elaborates on the research method and outlines the hypotheses, data
collection methods, the statistical sample and population and the “second-order CFA.” The
ﬁndings of the descriptive statistics as well as tests of the factorial analysis on various
components of the model are presented in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the results and
draws the conclusions. Lastly, Section 6 provides suggestions and limitations of the
research.

2. Theoretical development and literature review
Although various theories of professional ethics such as Aristotelian thoughts,
utilitarianism, deontology, inclusive justice, libertarianism and teleology have been
promoted and used in accounting (Dessler, 2015; Argandoña, 2016; Kolk, 2016; Marilyn and
Fisher, 2017), this study is generally based on inclusive justice. This is because the
philosophy of accounting is devised on positive paradigms and theories, especially justice.
Generally, based on the “theory of the stakeholders,” which is merged with justice oriented
theory (Donaldson and Preston, 1995; Jones, 1995), accounting is an information system
which provides different internal and external users with ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial
information of the organization to make economic decisions. This information is especially
expended by various users, including the government, investors, debtors, creditors, banks
and credit institutions, stock markets, employees and managers of organizations and
communities. They can be applied to fulﬁll and evaluate the organization’s current and
future operations, change the real and legal entities’ behavior and optimally allocate scarce
resources of the organizations (IFAC, 2014; Horngren et al., 2017). To attain these objectives,
the “qualitative characteristics of accounting information” such as relevancy, timeliness and
cost–beneﬁt analysis should also be taken into account in addition to its technical and
quantitative aspects to make accounting information reliable and useful. The stakeholder
theory is concerned with the principle that ﬁrms and managers should behave such that it is
ethically acceptable when dealing with their stakeholders and others (Jones, 1991). In this
case, ethical compliance would increase both the quantity and quality of the accounting
information (Smith, 2003; Khan and Gray, 2016).

2.1 Sustainable development model of professional accounting ethics
The speciﬁc theoretical basis of this article, however, is based on the argument that
dominant paradigms leading accountants to comply with professional ethics are affected
by various constructs. Consequently, the question that this paper intends to answer ﬁrst
is, what are the constructs that support the ethical behavior of professional accountants?
By studying the literature, adopting qualitative content analysis and adopting the
following theories, we propose “The sustainable development model of accounting
professional ethics” (SDM-APE) model. The four most important constructs of the model
are presented in Figure 1.
    These four consecutive constructs are: personal constructs, social constructs, economic-
organizational constructs and environmental constructs. The foundation of these constructs
along with relevant supporting studies will be explained in the following. These constructs
are explained by dovetailing “behavior change theories” (Glanz et al., 1997; Witte, 1997) and
its three components: social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986; Perry et al., 1990), theory of
planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991; Armitage and Conner, 2001) and theoretical stages of the
MEDAR




Figure 1.
SDM-APE


                    change (Prochaska et al., 1994) and sustainable development theory of accounting
                    (McKinley, 2008).


                    2.2 Personal constructs
                    Based on this model, the ethical behavior of an accountant is ﬁrst affected by the constructs
                    inﬂuencing the personal behavior. Figure 2 shows the main components of this personal
                    behavior.
                        It indicates that an accountant’s personal constructs, which include instincts, drives,
                    traits and other motivational drivers, are affected by two holistic variables: accountant’s
                    attitude and perceived behavior control. The ﬁrst variable relates to the degree to which the
                    accountant’s behavior is positively or negatively valued by himself/herself. The second
                    variable involves the accountant’s perceptions of his/her ability to conduct the designated
                    behavior to feel self-efﬁcacy. When these variables are combined, the output leads to the
                    emergence of the accountant’s “intension.” Intention relates to the accountant’s plans to
                    perform the identiﬁed task, which is expected to produce the desired behavior. Intention is
                    also determined by the accountant’s attitude (beliefs and values about the outcome of the
                    behavior) and subjective norms (beliefs about what other people think the accountant should
                    do or general social pressure). It is also shown that it is the most important variable in
                    predicting behavioral change.
                        In this regard, Yoon (2011) considered individuals’ ethical behavior under the impact of
                    two groups of factors. The ﬁrst group, which can be considered as personal characteristics,
                    includes justice, deontology, relativism, degree of selﬁshness and utilitarianism. All these

                                  Personal                    Individual                   Intensive
                                  Behavior                     Attitude                    Behavior

Figure 2.
Components of the
personal behavior                                             Perceived
                                                              Behavior
construct                                                      Control
factors affect the ethical judgment as the latter group of factors. Finally, ethical judgment,      Content
utilitarianism, degree of selﬁshness and justice directly affect ethical behavior.                  analysis
    West (2017) found that several aspects of Aristotle’s ethics can be fruitfully applied to the
ethics of professional accountants. These include the relationship between function, goals
and the good and awareness of the human goal to achieve Eudemonia, development of both
excellences of character and of intelligence and the signiﬁcance of non-rational aspects of
morality, including emotions, will, responsibility and choice.
    Waldron and Fisher (2017) found signiﬁcant differences in both the structure of personal
values and ethical judgments between practitioners and accounting students. Life-stage
effects play an important role in explaining these differences. Hedonistic values appear to
lose their prominence through the maturation process, while others such as security become
increasingly important. Unexpectedly, values are found to have a little direct impact on
ethical judgments. In the work of Payne et al. (2018), a moral decision-making basis is
provided for accounting professionals to employ during times of ethical dilemmas.

2.3 Social constructs
Accountant’s behavior, however, is not only driven by personal inner forces, but also by
external impediment constructs. Thus, the second major construct affecting the ethical
behavior of an accountant, which is represented in Figure 2, is the social pressures exerted
on the accountant by social actors, including parents, spouse and friends, to engage in or
refrain from conducting designated actions. Based on this construct, an accountant’s ethical
behavior is deeply inﬂuenced by the social factors consisting of affectability by what others
think and do as well as by norms and practices prevailing in the society. In effect, social
norms and structures largely deﬁne the accountants’ behavior. Some of the social factors
that inﬂuence an accountant’s behavior are: commitment, messenger, ego and social norms.
    Moreover, Mo et al. (2017) found that team fault lines signiﬁcantly moderated the
curvilinear relationship between ethical leadership and team creativity such that the
inverted U-shaped relationship was more signiﬁcant among teams with weak team fault
lines. Another research has scrutinized the usefulness of the social norm theory in empirical
business ethics (Blay et al., 2018). To show the merits of the social norm theory, examples
where the theory is applied effectively to experimental accounting research were presented
to generate new insights. They pinpointed the situations where the theory may be useful in
empirical business ethics research by providing those examples.

2.4 Economic-organizational construct
The third important construct affecting an accountant’s ethical behavior is the economic-
organizational factor. This construct includes the effect of the industry, type, size and
economic conditions of the organization on ethical behavior of the accountant. Here,
“organizational justice” is particularly considered as an inﬂuential factor, as it reﬂects the
compliance of the organization in enumerating the “fairness principle” (Whiteside and
Barclay, 2013). In the process of social exchange, when the accountant observes and
comprehends the justice and fairness behavior of the organization, he/she would provide
greater services to the organization far more than his/her designated duties, which will
provide higher returns and proﬁts for the organization. Organizational justice, on the other
hand, consists of three perspectives of distributive justice, procedural justice and
interactional justice (Adams, 1965). Distributive justice focuses on the equity and fairness of
the outcome of the behavior such that the accountant is compensated for his/her desirable
actions. Procedural justice emphasizes the fairness of organization’s process. Consistency of
procedures, lack of bias in performing procedures, maintaining accurate information for
MEDAR   decision-making and compliance of the procedures with ethical standards are the prime
        examples of this justice. Interactional justice relates to the personal relations interaction
        between management and accountants. Accountants who believe that managers maintain a
        fair relationship with them, with a greater probability, manage their relationships through
        exchanging social transactions, which ultimately leads to increased beneﬁts for the
        organization (Seifert et al., 2014).
            Having investigated factors affecting accountants’ ethical decisions in Sri Lanka,
        Liyanapathirana and Samkin (2014) provided a model based on which environmental factors,
        organizational factors such as organizational culture and demographic factors such as age,
        gender, experience, educational level and religion affect ethical decision-making. Knowledge
        about law and personal intention affects the ethical decision-making process. Nevertheless,
        ethical problems can also yield negative effects on personal decisions. The study of Latan et al.
        (2018) provided insights into the relationship of the individual levels of the precursor and how
        the intention of whistle-blowing is received by perceived organizational support, team norms
        and perceived moral intensity. Their ﬁndings suggested that the perceived organizational
        support, team norms and perceived moral intensity are important in controlling organizational
        behavior.

        2.5 Environmental constructs
        The fourth signiﬁcant construct regarding the ethical behavior of accountants relates to
        environmental and sustainable development factors. Environmental factors refer to the
        importance, protection, conservation and ethics of the environment. The importance of
        “corporate social responsibility” (CSR) is a major reason for dealing with environmental
        factors. When viewed from the outside, it is concerned with the organization’s impacts on
        society. However, when viewed from the inside, it explains how reﬂection on the ﬁrm and its
        role in society and acceptance of the resulting responsibilities inﬂuence the management of
        the ﬁrm (Argandoña, 2016). In recent years, businesses have begun to acknowledge the
        importance of CSR (Basu and Palazzo, 2008). The term CSR refers to the emergence of a
        movement which seeks to include social and environmental factors in business decisions of
        companies as well as accounting and business strategies with the aim of enhancing social
        and environmental performance alongside the economic dimensions such that they are
        beneﬁcial for the business, society and environment (McKinley, 2008). In other words,
        organizations are in charge of social responsibility, suggesting that they have to be careful
        not to inﬂuence the social life in a malicious way. Generally, not polluting the environment,
        being fair in employment, not engaging in immoral activities and informing customers
        about the quality of products are some duties of organizations. Also, this duty can be
        interpreted as having a positive inﬂuence on people’s lives (Fassin, 2008). The concept of
        CSR is very close to the concept of sustainable development, which depends on factors such
        as environmental support, economic growth and social justice. CSR refers to voluntary
        participation of a company in sustainable development beyond legal requirements and is
        considered as a method for reducing the gap between companies and stakeholders’
        expectations by reporting and disclosing additional information through a sustainable
        approach. One of the concepts in the area of professional accounting ethics is social
        responsibility which has also appeared in economics, law, ethics and religion. This indicates
        that accountants are committed to maximizing social beneﬁts and to minimizing social
        costs. So, there is a close link between professional accounting ethics and social
        responsibility in organizations (Cacioppo et al., 2008).
           From a general point of view on the development of CSR, it is observed that in recent
        years, the discussion on CSR has been closely related to previously predominant business
ethics with legal requirements, to address issues of incompliance of CSR and labor laws             Content
(Pﬂugrath et al., 2011). Now, countries are making it obligatory for enterprises to follow          analysis
labor laws and CSR practices (Asad et al., 2018).
   Note that the four key constructs and their components in the SDM-APE model are not
independent of each other and provide causal mutual interactions. For instance, personal
construct affects other constructs and their components. At the same time, it is also
inﬂuenced by other constructs. Therefore, the constructs of the SDM-APE model will
establish multi-interactions with each other. Accordingly, accounting ethics paradigms are
always being exchanged in the process of interactions, and constantly changing. Thus, a
paradigm may be considered dominant in some periods and cultures, while other paradigms
may be prevalent in other periods and cultures. Furthermore, accountants’ ethical behavior
is not an instant and revolutionary behavior; rather, it is an evolutionary process which
adopts the following consecutive paths according to theoretical stages of the change
(Prochaska et al., 1994):
    precontemplation: No recognition of need for or interest in change;
    contemplation: Thinking about change;
    preparation: Planning for change;
    action: Adopting contemporary habits; and
    maintenance: Ongoing practice of new, healthier behavior

Thanks to the comprehensiveness of the model and inclusion of signiﬁcant and robust
ethical constructs, implementation of this ethical model could provide the potential to
enhance efﬁciency, economic and social development, administrative integrity, satisfaction
and generally organizational excellence. Furthermore, this model will promote the
professional ethics and improve the organizational culture, augment the productivity, create
competitive advantage at the organizational level and promote public ethics, sustainable
growth and development at the national level. In general, it leads to the development of
healthy global competition and achieving a more desirable business world. Inclusion of the
sustainable development factor in the presented model also indicates the importance of
paying attention to surrounding environment and current accounting topics which have
been taken into account in contemporary studies by Kolk (2016), Khan and Gray (2016) and
Schaltegger and Burritt (2018).

3. Research methodology
This article used the mixed approach of qualitative and quantitative content analysis
(Creswell and Plano Clark, 2011). The research design is a quasi-design because it applies
past data to the research model (Smith, 2017).

3.1 Statistical population and data collection
The initial population of the present study consists of all ethical papers and theses published
in Iran during 2005-2015. Iran is selected as the statistical population because it is an ancient
country with a history of over 2,500 years, and thanks to the presence of famous
philosophers and ethicists such as Avicenna and Zakariyya al-Razī (Farsam, 2009). For
instance, the European people became familiar with “The Canon of Medicine,” a book by
Avicenna translated by Gerard of Cremona in the ﬁfteenth century which was then taught in
Louvain and Montpellier medical faculties until the seventeenth century. According to
UNESCO Journal, Avicenna’s Canon of Medicine book and his medical ethics were taught at
the University of Brussels until 1909 (Abu Ali, 2011, p. 21) . Furthermore, Iran has an ancient
MEDAR   and Islamic culture, philosophers and civilization, which have signiﬁcantly helped to
        develop a comprehensive and leading ethical model, that is well developed and beyond the
        existing models. Researchers’ knowledge of published ethical sources in the ﬁeld of
        accounting has also been another important criterion in selecting Iran as the statistical
        population.
           By using the preceding population study, we followed the guidelines for conducting the
        mixed approach of content analysis provided by Creswell and Plano Clark (2011) and
        Creamer and Ghoston (2013). Consequently, at ﬁrst, the process of qualitative content
        analysis approach presented by Bengtsson (2016), which is shown in the appendix, was
        implemented. This step involved performing from planning stages (aim of the study, unit of
        analysis, etc.) to data collection approach (publications of professional ethics), data
        analyzing approach (latent analysis and its stages) to responding to the research question:

           RQ1. What are the underlying constructs of the professional ethics in the accounting
                profession, and how important are they?
        By following the preceding steps, 569 papers and theses, which explicitly contained “ethics”
        in their titles and were related to professional and organizational ethics, were extracted from
        Iranian journals during the period of the study. Two types of articles, those containing
        articles about accounting professional ethics and other articles, were collected in this regard.
        The articles associated with accounting ethics were those with the main variables related to
        assessing ethical values or providing solution for accounting environment or accountants.
        Other articles explored the general status or provided solutions for various topics and
        professions such as Islamic, medical, engineering ethics, etc. in Iran. For this purpose, 16
        theses and 553 articles were studied as resources. As a result of this qualitative approach,
        four signiﬁcant constructs in professional accounting ethics were found: personal
        constructs, social constructs, economic-organizational constructs and environmental
        constructs. These constructs were entitled as elements of the SDM-APE model.
            Afterward, the articles were evaluated qualitatively and quantitatively in more depth by
        two independent researchers, and the obtained codes were allocated to each group of the
        SDM-APE model. The checklist was given to accounting experts and approved to determine
        its validity. Kappa’s coefﬁcient of agreement was applied in SPSS 22 software to inspect the
        reliability and researchers’ agreement.
            In Kappa’s formula, the ratio of a particular value, which is used by the coder in a group,
        is multiplied by the ratio of using the same value by the second coder. These ratios are then
        added together to obtain the expected agreement (Raif et al., 2002). The result we obtained
        from the Kappa test was 0.788. Reliability investigates different individuals’ agreement on
        coding a particular case. Landis and Koch’s (1997) grading was applied to judge the
        reliability status using the Kappa coefﬁcient. Based on their conclusion, the result we
        obtained lied within the range of acceptable coefﬁcients of agreement. As the agreement was
        between 0.61 and 0.80, the agreement was acceptable based on Landis and Koch’s (1997)
        grading.

        3.2 Importance of the components of the model of sustainable development of accounting
        In the second phase, this article used “quantitative content analysis” (Neuendorf, 2002;
        Smith, 2017) to obtain a quantitative model and its subsets, and applied “factor analysis” to
        quantitatively evaluate the importance of the elements of the four factors of the SDM-APE
        model. The preceding content analysis led to the discovery of 69 ethical factors distributed
        among four key constructs of the SDM-APE. Speciﬁcally, 12 out of these 69 variables were
        related to personal constructs, 29 to social constructs, 19 to organizational-economic
constructs and nine to environmental constructs. At this step, the following steps were              Content
taken, and the second-order CFA was used to investigate the importance of components of              analysis
the SDM-APE model from the perspectives of experts, professionals and academics by
converting the factors of the model into a questionnaire.

3.3 Statistical population and research sample
The statistical population of this part of research consisted of all professionals and academics
of accounting and other ﬁelds (auditing, management accounting, ﬁnancial accounting, tax
accounting, etc. in Iran). Given that it is extremely difﬁcult and somewhat impossible to
access the entire population and there is not any ofﬁcial statistics of their numbers, the
number of statistical population was assumed unknown. Therefore, equation (2) was
expended to calculate the sample size in an uncertain population. Based on equation (1), the
standard deviation d for a ﬁve-point Likert scale data was equal to 0.667 (Winner, 2009).
According to equation (2), the sample size was found to be 170:

                                maxðxi Þ  minðxi Þ 5  1
                          d ¼                      ¼      ¼ 0=667                              (1)
                                         6            6

                                  z2 a2 d 2 ð1=96Þ2 ð0=667Þ2
                             n5            ¼                 ¼ 170                             (2)
                                    «2          ð0=1Þ2

However, to compensate for non-responses and low rate of responses, and based on the
researchers’ experience in Iran, approximately 25 per cent were added to the number of
questionnaires, and so, 217 questionnaires were used in this research.

3.4 Data collection
The construct validity was utilized to investigate the validity of the questionnaire, and
Cronbach’s a was used to study the reliability. The validity was approved by different
experts and the obtained result of Cronbach’s a was equal to 0.94. As Cronbach’s a
coefﬁcient was higher than 0.70, the reliability of the research questionnaire was conﬁrmed.
   Data were collected via both face-to-face and virtual methods. In the former method, 54
questionnaires were completed by referring to available university professors, graduate
students and accounting experts. In the virtual method, the invitation was completed and
sent to the mentioned individuals after designing the questionnaire in Google Forms. They
were asked to send it to other professors, students and accounting experts for obtaining
accurate responses. In this method, 163 usable questionnaires were received, and
accordingly, a total of 217 questionnaires were collected.

3.5 Conﬁrmatory factor analysis
The second-order CFA was adopted to operationalize SDM-APE model. The second-order
CFA aims at examining hypotheses concerning the number of fundamental factors in a set
of variables, relationships of factors with indicators and ﬁt of the measurement model.
Nevertheless, in contrast with the ﬁrst-order CFA, it is applied when the latent factors in a
set of variables have multiple levels where the latent factors result from other latent factors.
Therefore, CFA is used to assure that data have been measured accurately. The magnitude
of the relationship between the factor (latent factor) and observable variable is represented
using factor loading. If the factor loading posits a value less than 0.2, the relationship will be
MEDAR                characterized as weak and neglected. A factor loading ranging from 0.2 to 0.6 is acceptable,
                     and if it is greater than 0.6, it will be more desired. The minimum factor loading accepted in
                     some resources is considered to be 0.2, though the t-statistic is the main criterion for
                     judgment. If the test statistic is above the critical value of t0.05 or 1.96, the observed factor
                     loading will be “signiﬁcant” (Kline, 1998).

                     4. Research results
                     4.1 Descriptive statistics
                     In this study, the mean age of respondents was 31.24 years, with a standard deviation of
                     7.24, and the mean work experience was 8.12 years, with a standard deviation of 7.18. Of the
                     respondents, 19 had PhD degrees (8.75 per cent), 59 were PhD students (27.2 per cent), 67
                     had master’s degrees (30.9 per cent), 46 were MA students (21.2 per cent) and 26 had
                     bachelor’s degrees (11.9 per cent). Accordingly, the statistical population of this study was in
                     a favorable condition and eligible. As a result, as far as demographic features are concerned,
                     the ﬁndings maintain necessary qualitative characteristics, including the internal validity.

                     4.2 Conﬁrmatory factor analysis of the personal construct
                     The results of CFA for personal features, including the general factors and moderation, are
                     presented in Figure 3. General factors reﬂect the underlying constructs associated with an
                     accountant’s personal characteristics, while moderation refers to the optimal use of the
                     mentioned variables without extremity. Two main factors (latent variable) and 12 questions
                     (observable variables) were utilized to measure the personal constructs. Each of these
                     variables has been displayed by Q1 to Q12 indices. The observable factor loading has been
                     somehow greater than 0.3 in all cases, which indicates that there is an acceptable correlation
                     between latent variables (dimensions of each main construct) and observable variables. The
                     signiﬁcance test was performed after identifying the correlation between variables.




Figure 3.
Standard factor
loading of the
personal construct
test
T-value statistics were used to determine the signiﬁcance of the relationship between                    Content
variables. As the signiﬁcance was investigated at an error level of 5 per cent, the                      analysis
relationship was signiﬁcant if the t-values test was greater than the critical value of 1.96
Based on the ﬁndings of Figure 4, t-values of measurement indices for each applied scale has
been greater than 1.96 at the conﬁdence level of 5 per cent; therefore, the observed
correlation is signiﬁcant.
    The goodness of ﬁt was investigated in the next step. Normal x 2 index, which is
obtained from simple division of x 2 by the degree of freedom, is one of the general indices
for determining free parameters in calculating the ﬁt indices. If this value ranges from 1
to 5, it is desirable. Normal x 2 was equal to 1.393 and thus, the result has been desired.
Furthermore, the RMSEA index is used as a main ﬁt index in most CFAs and structural
equation models. If this index is less than 0.05, the result will be optimal. This index was
equal to 0.043 in this model; hence, the goodness of the ﬁt of the model has also been
optimal.

4.3 Conﬁrmatory factor analysis of the social construct
The results of CFA of social characteristics, including social responsibility, personal
constructs and effective interaction, are presented in Figure 5. Although it is difﬁcult to
determine the boundary between personal and social factors, the main difference of
personal and social factors is that personal factors refer to an accountant’s personal
characteristics, while social factors deal with his/her social characteristics. In this regard,
social responsibility indicates an accountant’s commitment to community with regard to
his/her duties and responsibilities, while personal factors represent his/her intrinsic
characteristics in social communication. Effective interaction also refers to increased




                                                                                                          Figure 4.
                                                                                                  T-value statistic of
                                                                                                        the personal
                                                                                                       construct test
MEDAR




Figure 5.
Standard factor
loading of the social
construct test




                        efﬁciency in an accountant’s social communication. Three main factors (latent variables)
                        and 28 questions (observable variables) were used to measure social characteristics. All
                        of these variables have been shown with indices of Q13 to Q40. The observed factor
                        loading has been greater than 0.3 in all cases, which suggests that there is an acceptable
                        correlation between latent variables (aspects of each main construct) and observable
                        variables. After identifying the variables, it is necessary to run the signiﬁcance test. For
                        this purpose, t-values statistics is used. As signiﬁcance is investigated at an error level of
                        0.05, if t-values is greater than the critical value of 1.96, the relationship is signiﬁcant.
                        Figure 6 shows that t-values of measurement indices for each applied scale has been
                                                                                               Content
                                                                                               analysis




                                                                                                 Figure 6.
                                                                                         T-value statistic of
                                                                                        the social construct
                                                                                                         test




greater than 1.96 at a conﬁdence level of 5 per cent, indicating that the observed
correlations have been signiﬁcant.
   Normal x 2 proved to be 1.458 for the goodness of ﬁt. Furthermore, the RMSEA index
was equal to 0.046, indicating the desirability of the model ﬁt.
MEDAR             4.4 Conﬁrmatory factor analysis of the economic-organizational construct
                  The results of CFA of economic-organizational features, including the general
                  characteristics, integrity, compliance with professional principles and criteria, competence
                  and commitment, are presented in Figure 7. The general characteristics include the
                  underlying and general attributes required for an accountant. Integrity refers to the correct
                  implementation of the work by an accountant. Compliance with professional principles and
                  criteria represents implementation of rules and regulations of accounting by accountants.
                  Competence refers to an accountant’s professional qualiﬁcation and commitment to his/her
                  tasks. Overall, ﬁve main factors (latent variables) and 20 questions (observable variables)
                  were used to assess the economic-organizational features. All of these variables have been
                  shown by indices of Q41 to Q60. In all cases, the observed factor loading has been greater
                  than 0.3, indicating that the correlation has been acceptable between the latent variable
                  (dimensions of each main construct) and the observed variable. The t-value statistic was
                  also used to study the signiﬁcant correlation between variables. Figure 8 illustrates that the
                  t-test statistic has been greater than the critical value of 1.96, indicating that the observed
                  correlation has been signiﬁcant.
                      Normal x 2 was found to be 1.287 for the goodness of ﬁt. Furthermore, the RMSEA index
                  was equal to 0.037, indicating the goodness of ﬁt of the model.


                  4.5 Conﬁrmatory factor analysis of the environmental construct
                  Overall, nine questions (observable variables) were used to measure the environmental
                  construct. Each of these variables has been displayed by indices of Q61 to Q69. The observed
                  factor loading in all cases (except for Questions 62 and 65) was greater than 0.3, indicating an
                  acceptable correlation between latent variables (dimensions of each main structure) and
                  observable variables. The t-value statistic was also used to investigate the signiﬁcance of the
                  correlation between variables. Based on the ﬁndings of Figure 10, the t-values measurement




Figure 7.
Standard factor
loading of the
economic-
organizational
construct test
                                                                                                        Content
                                                                                                        analysis




                                                                                                         Figure 8.
                                                                                                 T-value statistic of
                                                                                                      the economic-
                                                                                                     organizational
                                                                                                      construct test




of the indices for each applied scale has been greater than 1.96 at the signiﬁcance level of 5
per cent, showing the signiﬁcance of the observed correlation (Figures 9 and 10).
    The normal x 2 proved to be 1.369 according to examination of the goodness of ﬁt of the
model. Furthermore, the RMSEA index was also equal to 0.041, indicating the ﬁtness of the
model.

4.6 Overall ﬁtness of the model
The results of CFA for all constructs of the SDM-APE model have been presented
individually in Figure 11. It shows that the maximum overall factor loading ﬁrst
belongs to the social construct, followed by personal, economic-organizational and
environmental constructs. This suggests that special attention should be paid to the
“social construct” for attaining and enhancing the dynamics and level of accounting
professional ethics.

5. Discussion and conclusion
The present study aimed at identifying and determining the importance of constructs of
accounting professional ethics through quantitative and qualitative analysis. In this regard,
the SDM-APE model was ﬁrst introduced. Then, 69 variables related to the four interrelated
constructs (personal, social, economic-organizational and environmental factors) of the
model were identiﬁed via content analysis. Afterward, the importance of each group of the
MEDAR




Figure 9.
Standard factor
loading of the
environmental
construct test




Figure 10.
T-value statistic of
the environmental
construct test



                       main constructs of the model and their key components were determined through “second-
                       order CFA.” The research population consisted of all professionals and academics in
                       accounting and other relevant ﬁelds (auditing, management accounting, ﬁnancial
                       accounting, tax accounting, etc.) in Iran. The data were collected by distributing 217
                       questionnaires across the statistical population.
                          Figures 3 and 4, which exhibit details of the personal construct affecting ethics, conﬁrm
                       the signiﬁcance of the elements of the “behavior change theories” (Glanz et al., 1997; Witte,
                       1997). They speciﬁcally indicate that the “moderation” component with a factor loading of
0.58 has had the greatest impact factors in comparison with the general factors (0.41).                    Content
Further, “avoiding the extravagance and wastefulness” (0.67) among the moderation factors,                 analysis
and “humility” (0.58) among the general factors, revealed the maximum factor loadings. Our
ﬁndings demonstrate the signiﬁcance of these data with respect to the prevalent theories in
this regard. The reason might be related to the importance of the nature of moderation
factors which persuade accountants not to behave unethically, in comparison with the
signiﬁcance of general factors dealing with committing ethical issues.
    The ﬁndings of Figures 5 and 6 conﬁrm the signiﬁcance of the “social cognitive theory”
(Bandura, 1986; Perry et al., 1990). They speciﬁcally illustrate that the factor analysis of the
social construct consists of three components, namely, social responsibility, personal factors
and effective interaction. Based on the ﬁndings, personal factors with a factor loading of 0.96
and social responsibility with a factor loading of 0.91 possess a higher impact factor than
that of the effective interaction with a factor loading of 0.63. The criticism from personal
factors (0.96), deontology (conscientiousness) from social responsibility (0.91) and abstaining
from harming other people from effective interaction (0.63) gave the maximum factor
loadings and hence are far more important than other factors. Our ﬁndings in terms of the
“social cognitive theory” revealed the signiﬁcance of these variables, which might have been
because of the strong inﬂuence of family and other factors affecting personal values, less
awareness and beliefs concerning CSR and attaching less importance to interaction effects
variables by accounting professionals.
    Five main factors (latent variables) and 19 questions (observable variables) were utilized
to measure the economic-organizational construct, as displayed in Figures 7 and 8. These
ﬁgures conﬁrm the underlying principle of the economics and “organizational justice” in
enumerating the “fairness principle” (Whiteside and Barclay, 2013). Speciﬁcally, according
to the results of the CFA, professional and organizational commitment (0.67), general
characteristics (0.65), compliance with professional principles and criteria (0.62), integrity
(0.47) and competence (0.31) presented the highest impact factors. In this regard, avoiding
misuse of organizational property and information (0.93) from integrity factor, providing
timely information (0.93) from professional competence, quality orientation (0.74) from
professional and organizational commitment, caution and prudence (0.73) from compliance
with professional principles and criteria and conﬁdentiality (0.60) from general
characteristics harbored the greatest factor loadings and importance. This might be
attributed to the interests of Iranian accountants in professional and organizational
commitment and avoiding misuse of organizational property and information.




                                                                                                            Figure 11.
                                                                                                   Overall ﬁtness of the
                                                                                                            sustainable
                                                                                                    development model
                                                                                                          of accounting
                                                                                                     professional ethics
MEDAR   Furthermore, nine questions (observable variables) were extracted to assess the
        environmental construct, as shown in Figures 9 and 10. These ﬁgures provide information
        with respect to the “sustainable development accounting theory” (McKinley, 2008).
        According to the results, “responsibility and accountability for environment” revealed the
        maximum impact factor with a factor loading of 0.89. Part of the reason might be due to the
        discussions of the sustainable development in the ethics literature and conferences which
        are organized on this subject (Namazi, Rajabdorri and Rostameymandi, 2017). The results
        also show that the issue of sustainable development has been mainly neglected in ethics, and
        more effort needs to be exerted in this domain.
            The ﬁndings illustrated in Figure 11 show that all constructs of the SDM-APE model,
        including personal, social, economic-organizational and environmental constructs, exhibited
        a good ﬁt, where the social, (0.71) personal (0.64), economic-organizational (0.57) and
        environmental characteristics (0.53) indicated the maximum ﬁt. In other words, the social
        construct presented the maximum ﬁt, while the environmental construct showed the
        minimum ﬁt. Part of the reason stems from the fact that accounting professionals are more
        inﬂuenced by social and cultural issues of ethics, and environmental considerations are not
        still an ethical priority for the accounting profession. This ﬁnding also suggests that there is
        an unequivocal need for more investment on these issues to move toward the ethics.
            Considering the lack of research in this ﬁeld, these ﬁndings are not directly comparable
        with the results of previous studies; however, the ﬁnal research results, suggesting that
        more attention should be paid to modeling professional ethics in accounting are consistent
        with the ﬁndings of numerous studies, such as Jones (1995), Wooten (2001), Yoon (2011),
        Liyanapathirana and Samkin (2014), West (2017), Namazi et al. (2017) and Payne et al. (2018),
        and related ethical theories. The ﬁndings also indicate that SDM-APE is a useful ethical
        model which is based on empirical proliferation of various important and comprehensive
        factors. This model qualitatively revealed major elements, correlations, priority and status
        of all essential factors of ethical components in the accounting profession through empirical
        investigation. Therefore, it can be applied in real practice, and be considered as a roadmap
        for future accounting model for ethics.

        6. Research limitations and suggestions
        This study had several limitations. It developed the SDM-APE model and its components
        according to content analysis, which indicated four constructs (personal, social,
        organizational-economic and environmental factors). The research model was also based on
        the 69 variables identiﬁed via content analysis of the published studies and administering
        questionnaires. The statistical analysis was conducted through CFA. Use of content
        analysis, questionnaires and CFA as a statistical technique bring inherent limitations
        (Smith, 2017). Although this model and its constructs are comprehensive and include
        personal, social, economic-organizational and even environmental constructs, it is limited to
        69 identiﬁed variables. Nevertheless, an attempt was made to control the internal and
        external validity of the study as much as possible.
           Given the importance of ethics, managers, accountants, researchers and
        professional accounting associations should pay special attention to four elements of
        the professional ethical model of this study, as organizations and societies are
        increasingly demanding ethical considerations and increased levels of professional
        ethics, particularly after recent scandals. Under these circumstances, practical
        implementation of the current model and investigation of other variables in real
        organizations are suggested to accelerate the role of ethics and determine relevant
        variables and their priorities in the organization. Professional accounting associations
can also consider the development of code of ethics in their plans by beneﬁting from                       Content
variables identiﬁed in this study, thereby promulgating appropriate standards of                           analysis
ethics, investigating comprehensive studies in this sphere and encouraging members
to be active in this domain. In addition, appropriate ethical educational programs and
research can be established by accounting bodies, universities and educational centers
to educate and emphasize the importance of planning and implementation of major
ethical issues in organizations. This research can also enhance the level of professional
ethics by highlighting the importance of each factor identiﬁed in the model of this
study.

References
Abu Ali, M.A. (2011), “Law and bone fractures”, Training Magazine, Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 20-26.
Adams, J. (1965), Inequity in Social Exchange, Academic Press, New York, NY.
Agostini, L., Nosella, A. and Filippini, R. (2016), “Towards an integrated view of the ambidextrous
       organization: a second-order factor model”, Creativity and Innovation Management, Vol. 25
       No. 1, pp. 129-141.
Ajzen, I. (1991), “The theory of planned behavior”, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
       Processes, Vol. 50 No. 2, pp. 179-211.
Argandoña, A. (2016), “Social responsibility and ethics in organizational management”, Working
       Paper, IESE Business School – University of Navarra.
Armitage, C. and Conner, M. (2001), “Efﬁcacy of the theory of planned behaviour: a meta-analytic
       review”, British Journal of Social Psychology, Vol. 40 No. 4, pp. 471-499.
Asad, M., Haider, H. and Fatima, M. (2018), “Corporate social responsibility, business ethics, and labor
       laws: a qualitative study on SMEs in Sialkot”, Journal of Legal, Ethical and Regulatory Issues,
       Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 1-7.
Bandura, A. (1986), Social Foundations of Thought and Action, Prentice-Hall, NJ.
Basu, K. and Palazzo, G. (2008), “Corporate social responsibility: a process model of sense making”,
       Academy of Management Review, Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 122-136.
Bengtsson, M. (2016), “How to plan and perform a qualitative study using content analysis”,
       Nursingplus Open, Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 8-14.
Blay, A.D., Gooden, E.S., Mellon, M.J. and Douglas, E. (2018), “The usefulness of social norm theory in
       empirical business ethics research: a review and suggestions for future research”, Journal of
       Business Ethics, Vol. 152 No. 1, pp. 191-206.
Cacioppo, J., Hawkley, L., Kalil, A., Hughes, M.E., Waite, L. and Thisted, R.A. (2008), “Happiness
       and the invisible threads of social connection: the Chicago health, aging, and social relations
       study”, in Eid, M. and Larsen, R. (Eds), The Science of Well-Being, Guilford, New York, NY,
       pp. 195-219.
Catherine, A. (2010), “Comparing the ethics codes: AICPA and IFAC: institute’s efforts focus on
       codifying and aligning rules with international standards”, Journal of Accountancy, Vol. 21
       No. 4, p. 4152.
Creswell, J.W. and Plano Clark, V.L. (2011), Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods Research, 2nd
       ed., Sage Publications, Los Angeles.
Creamer, E.G. and Ghoston, M.R. (2013), “Mixed content analysis: using a mixed methods content
       analysis to analyze mission statements from colleges of engineering”, Journal of Mixed Methods
       Research, Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 110-120.
Dessler, G. (2015), Fundamentals of Human Resource Management, 4th ed., Global Edition, Pearson
       International.
MEDAR   Donaldson, T. and Preston, L. (1995), “The stakeholder theory of the corporation: concepts, evidence,
               and implications”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 65-91.
        Farsam, H. (2009), “Brief history of pharmacy ethics in Iran”, Journal of Medical Ethics and History of
               Medicine, Vol. 2 No. 13, pp. 1-4.
        Fassin, Y. (2008), “SMEs and the fallacy of formalizing CSR”, Business Ethics: A European Review,
               Vol. 17 No. 4, pp. 364-378.
        Glanz, K., Lewis, F.M. and Rimer, B.K. (1997), Health Behavior and Health Education: Theory Research
               and Practice, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.
        Horngren, C.T., Srikant, M.D. and Madhav, R. (2017), Cost Accounting: A Managerial Emphasis, 16th
               ed., Pearson.
        International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants (IESBA) (2018), “Handbook of the international
               code of ethics for professional accountants”.
        International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) (2014), “Handbook of the code of ethics for
               professional accountants of the international ethics standards board for accountants
               (IESBA)”.
        Jones, T. (1995), “Instrumental stakeholder theory: a synthesis of ethics and economics”, Academy of
               Management Review, Vol. 20 No. 2, pp. 404-437.
        Jones, T.M. (1991), “Ethical decision making by individuals in organizations: an issue-contingent
               model”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 366-395.
        Khan, T. and Gray, R. (2016), “Accounting, identity, autopoiesis þ sustainability: a comment,
               development and expansion on Lawrence, Botes, Collins and Roper (2013)”, Meditari
               Accountancy Research, Vol. 24 No. 1, pp. 36-55.
        Kline, R.B. (1998), Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling, Guilford Press, New York,
               NY.
        Kolk, A. (2016), “The social responsibility of international business: from ethics and the environment to
               CSR and sustainable development”, Journal of World Business, Vol. 51 No. 1, pp. 23-34.
        Landis, R.J. and Koch, G.G. (1997), “The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data”,
               Biometrics, Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 159-174.
        Latan, H., Ringle, C.M. and Jabbour, C.J.C. (2018), “Whistleblowing intentions among public
               accountants in Indonesia: Testing for the moderation effects”, Journal of Business Ethics,
               Vol. 152 No. 2, pp. 573-588.
        Liyanapathirana, N.S. Samkin, G. (2014), “Towards an integrated ethical decision making model for
               the accounting profession, a developing country, Sri Lanka”, available at: https://cdn.
               auckland.ac.nz/assets/business/about/seminars-events/2014/Towards%20an%20integrated%
               20ethical%20decision%20making%20model%20for%20the%20accounting%20p. . ..pdf
               (accessed 25 November 2016).
        McKinley, A. (2008), “The drivers and performance of corporate environmental and social
               responsibility in the Canadian mining industry”, Master Thesis Geography Department and
               Center for Environment University of Toronto.
        Marilyn, W. and Fisher, R. (2017), “Values and ethical judgments: the adequacy of students as
               surrogates for professional accountants”, Meditari Accountancy Research, Vol. 25 No. 1,
               pp. 37-64.
        Mitschow, M. and Asgary, N. (2004), “Ethics in auditing”, in Jeffrey, C, (Ed.), Research on Professional
               Responsibility and Ethics in Accounting, Research on Professional Responsibility and Ethics in
               Accounting, Vol. 9, Emerald Publishing Limited, pp. 49-72.
        Mo, S., Ling, C.D. and Xie, X.Y. (2017), “The curvilinear relationship between ethical leadership and
               team creativity: the moderating role of team faultiness”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 140
               No. 1, pp. 1-14.
Mustapha, B. and Bojuwon, Y.B. (2015), “Measuring lecturers commitment scales: a second order               Content
        conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA)”, International Journal of Education and Research, Vol. 3
        No. 3, pp. 505-516.                                                                                 analysis
Namazi, M., Rajabdorri, H. and Rostameymandi, A. (2017), “Codifying sustainable development pattern
        of accounting professional ethics”, Journal of Ethics in Science and Technology, Vol. 12 No. 4,
        pp. 1-11.
Neuendorf, K. (2002), The Content Analysis Guidebook, Cleveland State University.
Payne, D., Corey, C. and Raiborn, C. (2018), “A model code of ethics for decision making in accounting
        professions”, Southwest Academy of Management Proceedings Annual Meeting, Albuquerque,
        NM, 7-10 March, pp. 215- 230.
Perry, C.L., Barnowski, T. and Parcel, G.S. (1990), How Individuals, Environments, and Health Behavior
        Interact: Social Learning Theory, San Francisco, CA.
Pﬂugrath, G., Roebuck, P. and Simnett, R. (2011), “Impact of assurance and assurer’s professional
        afﬁliation on ﬁnancial analysts’ assessment of credibility of corporate social responsibility
        information”, Auditing: A Journal of Practice and Theory, Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 239-254.
Prochaska, J.O., Norcross, J.C., D. and Clemente, C.C. (1994), Changing for Good: The Revolutionary
        Program That Explains the Six Stages of Change and Teaches You How to Free Yourself from
        Bad Habits, W. Morrow, New York, NY.
Raif, D., Lacey, S. and Fico, F. (2002), Analyzing Media Messages: Using Quantitative Content Analysis
        in Research (Communication), Routledge.
Schaltegger, S. and Burritt, R. (2018), “Business cases and corporate engagement with sustainability:
        differentiating ethical motivations”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 147 No. 2, pp. 241-259.
Seifert, D.L., Stammerjohan, W.W. and Martin, R.B. (2014), “Trust, organizational justice, and
        whistleblowing: a research note”, Behavioral Research in Accounting, Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 157-168.
Smith, M. (2003), “A fresh look at accounting ethics”, Accounting Horizons, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 47-49.
Smith, M. (2017), Research Methods in Accounting, Sage Publications, London.
Verschoor, C. (2005), “Do the right thing: IMA issues new ethics guidance”, Strategic Finance, Vol. 87,
        pp. 42-47.
Waldron, M. and Fisher, R. (2017), “Values and ethical judgments: the adequacy of students as
        surrogates for professional accountants”, Meditari Accountancy Research, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 1-39.
West, A. (2017), “The ethics of professional accountants: an Aristotelian perspective”, Accounting,
        Auditing and Accountability Journal, Vol. 30 No. 2, pp. 1-28.
Whiteside, D.B. and Barclay, L.J. (2013), “Echoes of silence: employee silence as a mediator between
        overall justice and employee outcomes”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 116 No. 2, pp. 251-266.
Winner, L. (2009), Applied Statistical Methods, Department of Statistics, and University of FL.
Witte, K. (1997), “Preventing teen pregnancy through persuasive communication”, Journal of
        Community Health, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 137-155.
Wooten, K.C. (2001), “Ethical dilemmas in human resource management: an application of a
        multidimensional framework, a unifying taxonomy, and applicable codes”, Human Resource
        Management Review, Vol. 11, pp. 159-175.
Yoon, C. (2011), “Ethical decision-making in the internet context: development and test of an initial
        model based on moral philosophy”, Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 27 No. 6, pp. 2401-2409.
MEDAR                 Appendix




Figure A1.
An overview of the
process of a
qualitative content
analysis from
planning to
presentation



                      Corresponding author
                      Hossein Rajabdorri can be contacted at: hosrado@gmail.com




                      For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
                      www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
                      Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
